>> Good evening ladies and gentleman. Your city station, in cooperation with the New York Academy of Medicine, these are the first of the season's lectures to the laity. Lectures presented by the Academy are open to the public free of charge and are held at the Auditorium of the Academy of Medicine, from which we are now broadcasting. The lectures are intended to bring to the layman knowledge and understanding of the new developments in medicine, and insight into the processes involving such development. The lecturers are the scientists whose labors in the many fields sum up to this progress in medicine. Their talks, though given in the layman's language, sacrificed none of the precision and reality of the experiences which have made up the knowledge attained. This season's theme is the reciprocal relations between medicine and the other disciplines. Our speaker tonight, delivering the annual Linsly R. Williams [assumed spelling] Memorial Lecture, is Dr. Norbert Wiener, a professor of Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. To open the evening's program, here now is the President of the Academy, Dr. Alexander T. Martin.

>> Alexander T. Martin: Ladies and gentleman, I'm very glad to have this opportunity to open these lectures to the laity. This represents the 19th series of these lectures. The lectures have been--are under the sponsorship of the Committee on Medical Information, which Dr. Frank J. McGowan is our Chairman, and under the Executive Secretary-ship of Dr. Ialgo Galston [assumed spelling]. He and his very able staff have really motivated and arranged for these lectures. The lectures themselves have been arranged for by the Committee on Laity Lectures, which Dr. Harold B. Keyes is Chairman, and the Executive Secretary, again, being Dr. Ialgo Galston. This first lecture tonight, of the 19th series, is a memorial lecture to Dr. Linsly R. Williams. Dr. Linsly R. Williams, to whose memory this evening's lecture is dedicated, was the first Director of our New York Academy of Medicine. He was a man of distinguished character, a genial, intelligent, devoted and inspiring soul. He died almost 20 years ago, but his spirit dwells in our midst. Those who were fortunate enough to know him in person retained for him an abiding affection. The laity lectures were initiated shortly after Dr. Williams took over the Directorship of this academy. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the series. Because of his broad experience in public health, he keenly appreciated the importance of bringing to the public authentic knowledge on what is going on in medicine, and what it means for the profession and for the public. In this, the first lecture of the current series, I salute the memory of a fine man. This, I'd like to add, that this 19th series of Lectures to the Laity has been dedicated by vote of the Council of the Academy, to the bicentennial theme of Columbia University. Columbia University next year is holding their 200th anniversary. And these lectures are being dedicated to the theme of this bicentennial, which is Man's Right to Knowledge and the Free Use Thereof. I will now turn the platform over to the Chairman of the Committee on Lectures to the Leity, Dr. Harold B. Keyes, who is Director of Surgery and Attending Surgeon at the French Hospital since 1918. Dr. Keyes?

>> Harold B. Keyes: Good evening ladies and gentleman. On behalf of the Committee On Laity Lectures, again, we welcome you here. We're glad you're here, and we think you will find these lectures a very inspiring series of lectures. As you know, we are on the air. And we wish to thank the radio station WNYC, and its Director, Mr. Seymour Siegel, for their cooperation and their courtesy and their generosity to us, so that we may broadcast these lectures. We have distinguished speakers. We likewise have distinguished Chairmen and the Chairman of the evening tonight is Dr. Frank Joseph McGowan. Dr. McGowan is a Fellow of the New York Academy of Medicine, and has been since 1927. He is now Chairman of the large Committee on Medical Information. Dr. McGowan is a native New Yorker. He is a graduate of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. He has a distinguished roster of institutions with which he is connected. He is consultant surgeon at King's Park State Hospital, and of New York Eye and Ear Infirmary. He is Director of Surgery at Gouverneur Hospital. He is a visiting surgeon at St. Vincent's Hospital. He is attending surgeon at the Veterans' Hospital. Associate Attending Surgeon at New York University, Bellevue Medical Center. Associate Clinical Professor of Surgery at New York Hospital, Cornell University. Associate Clinical Professor of Surgery at New York University. Consulting Surgeon at Harlem Hospital. He was a Colonel in the Medical Corps of the United States Army, and in addition to that, he has time to devote to the New York Academy of Medicine. I introduce Dr. McGowan.

>> Dr. Frank Joseph McGowan: [Applause] Guests. Despite the fact that the distinguished gentleman who is to give this evening's lecture is the eminent Professor of Mathematics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and deals in such esoteric subjects as trigonometric expansion, potential theory mathematical logic, relativity, and cybernetics. It is, in effect, not difficult to introduce him. To begin with, all that is relevant to his personal life, he has sat down and his book entitled Ex-Prodigy, My Childhood and Youth. This autobiography was recently published by Simon and Schuster. Then we have previously had the pleasure of Professor Waina's [assumed spelling] presence, and his performance as a lecturer in our Laity Lecture series. Hence, we can count upon him as an old friend. And I'm sure, known to many of you. Sufficient to say that Professor Waina is one of the world's outstanding mathematicians, a man of protean interest, and seemingly, universal competence. At home in several Chinese dialects, at ease with Homeric poetry, reciting from memory long passages of the classic poems, he's an authority on the Nonsense Rhymes of Lear and thoroughly informed on the obvious, and the hidden meaning in Alice in Wonderland. But tonight, Norbert Wiener is neither to talk Chinese nor recite Homer, nor expound nonsense rhymes. He is, rather, going to initiate the current series of lectures devoted to the theme of the Reciprocal Relations Between Medicine and the Other Disciplines, by treating the subject of the evening the relation of physics to medicine. I am highly honored, and take great pleasure, in presenting to you, Professor Norbert Weiner.

[ Applause ]

>> Professor Norbert Wiener: We often think of medicine and physics as growing to quite separate fields, and in fact the pattern which they have assumed over the greater part of the last century is rather a separate pattern. Now, what I want to discuss is what the pattern of medical treatment, and even medical research, actually is, what the pattern of physical research actually is, and to show that the conventional way in which these have been put into two sharply differentiated patterns is not, in fact, altogether correct. Or at least does not represent the most recent views on the subject. In medicine, well, supposing that we have a patient to be examined. At least, I assume I'm talking correctly, and talking subject to any criticism that can be made, and I hope there will be some. The first thing we do, the patient comes because of some illness or some examination. And one of the first things we do, in addition to examining his present condition, would be to examine his history as well. Then, on the basis of how the present condition, of what symptoms are shown, what the present condition is, something like a preliminary prognosis is made. That is, an experian [phonetic spelling] determination of what might be expected after the diagnosis, the prognosis. The diagnosis, then the prognosis, then comes treatment or, if you want a highbrow word for it, therapeusis [assumed spelling], and then, in view of the treatment, a reassessment of the possibly the diagnosis and very likely the prognosis, there is a continual interplay of two thoughts of activity. Questioning activity, and activity of treatment. But we never forget that we are intervening in a process, in a process which is pathological in many cases, or we are at least examining a physiological process, with the intent of changing in the certain direction that we wish to change it, perhaps of making it more normal. But it is impossible to understand what we are doing in medicine without a thorough understanding of what the notion of process is altogether. Now, in the classical physics, the physics that dominated everything to the end of the last century, while a process occurred, it occurred in a peculiarly attenuated form. The physics of the last century was, in essence, the physics of Newton. Of the Newtonian laws. And the Newtonian laws would present an environment to physics curiously hostile to the notion that any particular thing causes a particular thing. That very sort of notion of cause which is indispensable to the doctor. The doctor is asking what is causing an illness, or what keeps a normal process going on its normal level, questions of causality, questions of degree of causality, are always important to him. They're indispensable to him. But in the physics, in the Newtonian physics, the only thing that was responsible for the future of the universe was the present of the universe, with all positions and momentum, together with the forces, acting. Since the universe was connected together rigidly, the question of what was the cause of what was too loose a notion to have any meaning. Now, the idea that a rigid structure is not easy to dissect apart as to its internal stresses and strains, is quite true literally. And not only true, but when it comes to actual physical structures, this can be a dangerous fact. Suppose, for example, that we have a welded bridge. And here, I'm talking about a mechanical rigidity. The bridge is not made of separate members pinned together, so as to allow them to rotate, to allow them to settle out in one impossible way only, but the webs are welded, or very tightly riveted. And what is more, we're going to have a material which obeys the laws of elasticity perfectly. We're going to have a material like glass. For a material which obeys the laws of elasticity perfectly up to the breaking point is a brittle material. Brittleness means exactly that. It does not mean weakness. It means that when the thing goes, there's no intermediate stage where it nearly obeys the laws of elasticity, but sharply departs from them. What do you have in such a break? The truth of the matter is, you don't know what that bridge, what strains it's undergoing. To do that, you would have to introduce some means that involved the actual bending of the bridge, the fact that it is not perfectly rigid, and if you didn't do that, you would be likely to find enormously large local strains and the very slightest cooling or warming or anything happening to it would break it, and it would be no good whatever. That's not a theoretical difficulty. It is a difficulty which occurs when materials which are, in a sense, over-rigid, and a design which is over-rigid. Now, similarly, in a physical system where only everything causes everything, to determine what is important and what is unimportant has no meaning. Important causes or unimportant cause do not exist in Newtonian. They make no sense. And why is Newtonian physics like that? Well, what was the particular place in physics in which Newton worked? I do not believe that Newton made a single clean application of what we might call engineering physics. The interests were in gravitational physics, and in the physics of astronomy, say in particular in the solar system. Now, the solar system is a system which is as unlike as possible the systems we deal with in medicine. In the first place, one of the hardest things to do in medicine and in most [inaudible] to the physics, is to isolate a phenomenon. To separate it from other causes, that we've not figured upon that are acting on it, but in gravitational astronomy, a high degree of isolation is very easy. The two things that might disturb gravitational astronomy--one thing is something outside the solar system, the only thing that I can think of that has the force enough to be of any importance is light--and star light is very faint light. And while some effect from star light might be visible on the tail of a comet, I can't think of any other effect on gravitational astronomy which would be likely to show in a century. Star light is so slight that it represents an almost perfect state of isolation. There's another thing that might interfere with gravitational astronomy. Namely, what's happening on the individual planets. And not, as we supposed, for the first approximation force point, or even as we suppose for a second approximation rigid bodies, elastic bodies, bodies with various internal frictions in them, they do disturb astronomy. There is a phenomenon known as tide revolution, on which the forces in the moon have ultimately brought--and the earth, and the seas--the moon face with one side always towards the earth, and those things are well known. But they're extraordinarily slight, and over a decade or so, you could probably forget them quite completely in computing an [inaudible]. The result is that you have furnished, for nothing to you, an isolated system far more perfect than you could ever get, not only in medicine, but in engineering physics, without any effort to isolate it. And in this, you have certain things that are completely abnormal in physics. One of the most interesting things is that computing an article almanac ahead, and computing it backward, are done in just about the same way, merely by reversing all velocities. Now, its absolutely abnormal for investigation ahead, and investigation backward, to be as closely parallel as that. For one reason, we can't ask the same questions in most cases. The average physical experiment is something like the following thing. I won't make a physical experiment, but I'll make an experiment. We wanted to study the behavior of rabbits. We put a rabbit in a box, opened the box, let the rabbit run loose and see how it runs. That would be a type of experiment, seeing an animal behavior. Now, try to reverse that experiment. Instead of letting rabbits run from boxes, where they've been subject to constraints and then act freely later, you want rabbits to run into boxes, and be free from constraints for all later history. Well, I may say that the experiment of putting boxes and waiting for rabbits to run into them is not a very good experiment, it takes too long [laughter]. It is surprisingly like the task of the aged, aged man in through the looking glass, have the grassy knolls for wheels of handsome cabs, where it may be a very edifying occupation, but you are not going to get many handsome cabs that way. Neither are you going to find many rabbits run into your boxes. Well, in other words, the experiment which I've suggested by the rabbits in the boxes is typical of what you do in physics. You condition an experiment to a certain uniformity. You do what is called pollination. You make the system arbitrarily uniform, you make it arbitrarily isolated, then you let the future run free with its past determined, and see what is happening. That is, an experiment which we cannot humanly reverse. And the direction of time is an essential part of the experiment. Well! Last, we have two aspects of physics. The symmetrical aspect by the laws of motion, where the particular coordinates of the system, the coordinates velocities causing all the coordinates velocities of the future, with the causality permeating everything, and nothing the specific cause of anything, and the other sort of a system which is like the gravity experiment where we've combed out the past, let the system run free, where certain things affect other things more than others, where the direction of causality is important. And the second, which actually covers what we do, in large part, in physics, is also extremely relevant to what we do in medicine. The whole vocabulary of medicine, of prognosis, treatment, a diagnosis, a history and so on, all have to do with a direction of time and a direction of causality. Now, I want to call to your attention that the type of science, the type of art that medicine is, has been spreading of recent years over a very much greater sector of science than that which we have associated medicine in the past. I wonder how many of you have heard the magic words that were being used all through the war and after the war, of operational analysis? Let's see how we would face a military problem, and they're not only military problems nowadays. We want to design an anti-aircraft gun to do some very special task, shoot ahead of an airplane. Well, there again, we've got to investigate how the situation's been in the past. The history. We've got to see what actually happens. How will the system operate? We've got to study the physiology of the situation. We've got to study the pathology. How the present operation goes wrong. We've got to diagnose where it goes wrong. We have to determine not only how it goes wrong in a particular case, but what the outcome of a particular program of attack by means of it, in order to eliminate the dangers of the enemy airplane attack. We've got to make a prognosis, there. We've got to introduce a therapeusis, the ways of patching up the attack, or modifying the attack, so that it will be effective. The whole mode of thought of the man who is doing what is called operational analysis in war is exactly parallel to that of the doctor. Now this would be interesting if it weren't war alone, but this represents something that has almost immediately after the war spread out of military action into the largest range of civilian action. In business, for example. One of the outgrowths of what is called operational analysis or the planning of a campaign, and so on, from the standpoint of making the means available most effective to accomplish a given end in business is the question of inventories. That was a terrific headache to the Army, but it's a terrific headache in civilian business. You have a plant that covers the whole country. You have warehouses. These warehouses are localized, are placed locally, with a certain access to certain markets, a certain access to certain factories, and so on. You know that if you load up your warehouses unnecessarily, you're tying up material as capital, you will have to pay interest to keep it, and you're losing money, and may lose it hand over fist and may go bankrupt on big inventories. You know that if you've small inventories, the inventories are too small and you've got to turn orders away, you're going to lose the business of these orders, but what's more, you'll lose the goodwill of these orders, and have to pay at a penalty rate for your carelessness, a penalty rate that is something like a penalty clause in an engineering job. It may actually be a penalty clause that you have to pay. You know, in other words, that you've got to, through this complication of things, steer a policy, and that this policy involves both a knowledge of the physiology of business, and the pathology of business. There has been a great deal of progress actually made in the use of mathematical methods, aligned to those which were used in war operational analysis in this field, and it is now an established method of working. I'll tell you another problem which is aligned to this, that has come up recently. Very much in practice. You want to design a machine, say an alarm clock. Now, in designing this alarm clock, your final object is to keep a certain accuracy. But this accuracy depends upon a whole lot of things that you do. The different parts come into action not simultaneously but successively. One way of saving accuracy may be by putting more work say onto the mainspring. Another work, another thing may be by spending more attention in cutting the palates. And I can think of dozens of things. Another is to use, string something with less hysteresis, less energy loss. Now when you consider the way that you build your final accuracy, there may be dozens, there may be hundreds of ways. But in general, they won't cost the same. And one of the problems of design is to do this with a minimum cost. It won't always be minimum cost. You might have a similar problem in medicine, where you are trying to design the different parts of a treatment, introduce a certain effect within certain limits, but with minimum strain otherwise on the health of the patient. Something has got to be minimized or maximized. This has been reduced to mathematics. The mathematics is not easy to solve, but at least the fundamental form of the solution has been envisaged. It ties up with a concept of the problem where the chief things that you're working with are not measures, but probabilities of measures, and I, myself, have contributed some mathematical tools which give us promise of being very useful in this. But there, you see, something that is being done on a mathematical, on an engineering level, which is very parallel in its general conception to what is being done in medicine. Now, what I want to say is that not only this very special group of operational problems is assuming a form parallel to that of medicine, but I can go further. The general concept of the physics of the present day is much closer to the study of operational methods in engineering design than it might have been thought to be 50 years ago. Viridian physics 50 years ago, with no probability, with no individual thing causing anything more or less, but simply everything in the past causing everything in the future, has now gone and the first step of the passing of that original physics took place between 1900 and 1903 in the United States and the man who did this in New Haven was Willard Gibbs. There's some very interesting history of science to be given there, because Gibbs did a piece of work which made everybody think not in terms of the single system, going from a single set of causes to a single set of effects, but it was a distribution of systems, in some of which certain causes were more important than others introducing certain effects, that when he weighed a certain variation of the cause, some made a big variation in the effect, and some made a small. It introduced this whole point of view which was known as statistical mechanics, and which was without doubt the finest piece of scientific work ever done in the United States. Gibbs' sense of what he was doing was perfectly right. There's only one little thing to be said. The details of what he did were completely wrong. That the sort of thing he was trying to do was right, but when he tried to define it more closely, there was nothing in the world that answered the thing he was describing. That what he called his Ergodic hypothesis, which allowed people to compare averages over sets of systems and averages over time, was invented to do a very necessary task, but didn't do that task. The more surprising thing still is that at the time, at the very moment that Gibbs was working on this new physics, which he saw, but could not fully justify in detail, two men in France were doing exactly what Gibbs needed. The two men being Borel and Lebague [phonetic spelling]. The men were still alive, as best described by a friend of mine, Professor LeWare [assumed spelling] of the University of California, as a three-dimensional physicist, a good mathematician, a man who had a sense of physical reality all the time. And the very great mathematician, Lebague, who worked under him, who was directed as to what he was trying to get by Borel, but got the result that Borel was unable to get, was described to me by Louerve [assumed spelling] as a flat mathematician, a man interested in the abstract, rather than the physical application. They grew the work which 30 years later was going to give the path to testify what Gibbs had done, which hadn't been done for 30 years. And the work was done, again in this country, Professor G. D. Berkhoff [assumed spelling] at Harvard, following outlines done by Fenoymen [assumed spelling] at Princeton, and by Koopman [assumed spelling] at Columbia. Even before that, about 1920, ten years before that, I'd been working in a similar field, and I made one of the very early applications of the main integral to a particular Gibbs' piece of work in the study of the [inaudible] motion. Well, it has then been, for as long as the scientific life as anybody here, the custom in physics not to ask the question what is one system going to do in the future if you give it a precise initial condition and let it go and this was a good spoonerism. But, what will happen if you take a large number of systems and discuss what happens to them statistically on the end of it. Now, under those conditions, certain changes produce a result more sensitively than other changes, and you can talk about causality. Now the first result of the new physics was this Gibbsean [assumed spelling] stage in which the individual systems behaved as they should in utonian systems, but you're asking new questions about them, namely not what would happen to a single system, but what would probably happen to one of the distribution of systems. In 1925, a new stamp was made, which led to something which was seen from the very beginning to have a close relation to the work of Gibbs, but was also seen to be very different, in that Newton's laws of dynamics were given up and replaced by new laws, and that the questions we ask were still statistical questions. This is called quantum mechanics. It has proved enormously successful. It did not immediately take a purely Gibbsean form, I think I can say that some work that I've been doing recently, however, that it can be reduced to a form very closely parallel to that of Gibbs. And it represents a new stamp in which not only do we have statistical systems of mechanics, instead of single widget systems, but even these statistics are not statistics of systems satisfying Newton's laws at all. Well then, what I have said may seem to indicate merely that medicine is--that physics is taking a form more compatible with that of medicine than it has in the past. And that would be a very unsatisfactory state to leave this lecture in, and would be, besides, very misleading because what has happened is not only a deflection of physics in the direction of medicine, but a very great deflection of medicine in the direction of physics. There are two sorts of phenomena, that I will mention this in connection with. One type of phenomenon is the phenomenon of homeostasis. We know that the body can only exist under very narrow physical circumstances. That was brought out by Lawrence J. Henderson of the Fitness of the Environment, but it goes back to older ideas of Cannon and of Claude Verna [assumed spelling] concerning homeostasis. It would only take a few degrees of temperature to kill any one of us, and that temperature is not maintained simply by packing the outside with materials of the right temperature. We definitely tend to resist a change in temperature. If we drink cold water, well something happens to oppose that and prevent us from being over-chilled by it. If we go out in the sun, there is something that makes us perspire to prevent us from getting a fever. You know how a room here can be equipped with a thermostat so that if anything tends to warm the room, the thermostat tends to cool it, and you know how such a thermostat, besides its normal functioning in keeping the room at fairly constant temperature, may itself misbehave and have diseases. I don't suppose there's anybody who hasn't had the habit of building a fire in the fireplace in the room which its housed thermostat is, and therefore, inadvertently cooling the house by building the fire. Of course it does. It makes the thermostat read wrong, and tell you that it is warmer than it is, and so you cool the house. Well, fever itself is a disease of that sort. Something happens to cool the body because something in the whole mechanism which records departures from temperature and tends to bring them back to normal has gone wrong. And this concept, that diseases can be diseases of homeostasis, diseases of the process which tends to control abnormalities in temperature is in my humble opinion a very potent notion. Now, there are plenty of cases besides that where one of the places where we should look for disease is in the mechanism that tends to keep body conditions constant, and that where there's a certain amount of evidence that that's exactly where some of the problem occurs. What exactly--one very interesting thing has been found, and don't ask me for the reference, I'm giving it in my paper that I give to be published, but I can't put my hand on it at once, some work has been done on liver regeneration. As you know, the liver is almost the only organ of the human body which shows in the adult phase very extensive regeneration. And by the way, Gibbs must have known that, otherwise they wouldn't have put the [inaudible] because it is one of the few organs that you can carve pieces away continuously, within a normal time, and have the patient come back to par. I think that is correct. The interesting thing is this. That if you do carve pieces from a person's liver, it regenerates. But, there is a mechanism which tends to hold the regeneration, at any rate, with the animals we've worked with, at the point when enough is regenerated. Apparently, when it sufficiently has regenerated, then in one way or another, a process is turned on that it cuts down on the rate of regeneration and prevents the regeneration from running wild. And regeneration running wild may not be cancer, but it's so much like it. The difference isn't tremendous. Regeneration--if it uncontrolled when regeneration is complete, the process has a certain similarity to cancerous process. Now, we ran into that in something that is a quasi-cancerous process. I was working with a young man at Mojave, and we were discussing leukemia. And in leukemia you have a very interesting thing. You would have an excessive formation of leukocytes. Now, there are two different processes which occur, the production and destruction of leukocytes. We know this--that the rate of increase of leukocytes in leukemia, while it's relatively fast, it's far, far slower than the rate of reduction of leukocytes. Now notice what this means. It means that the rate of increased is produced by a production or a destruction, which are still rather closely keyed to one another. Because if they were not keyed to one another, and you made one of them vary a great deal, the percentage variation of the difference would be enormously greater. Therefore, you still seem to have something connecting production and destruction whose rate of action is all gone wrong. But not so completely wrong that some attempt to produce normality cannot be recognized. In other words, where the situation seems to me to fit the notion of a diseased homeostasis which is, however, not yet a nonexistent homeostasis. A non-existent homeostasis would not tend to give a small quantity of the difference between two [inaudible] ones, is the production and destruction are still keen to one another, then the difference between them would go altogether. That is one field, the field of homeostasis, and the related feels of cancer and cancerous-like diseases, where I think that something like operational analysis, the study of process, may be a very useful tool in the future, the study of feedback processes, the same repertoire of notions which is used in operational analysis may be very promising in the future. That is one thing. Now, go to a very different field, where I have been doing something rather like operational analysis, and still more like ordinary physics. And that is the study of brain waves. You know these electrical waves in the brain, the alpha rhythm, and the various other rhythms. Now the obvious thing to do to them is to just look at them, see the ups and downs of the voltage, see how frequently the thing repeats, and study brain waves that way. And that is the way that the greater part of the work has been done until recently. But it's becoming apparent on various sides there's a lot more to brain waves than meets the eye that way. On the one hand, Gray Walter, and his school, are studying complicated pieces of apparatus to give the space pattern of brain waves in the brain, and seeing what they can do that way, but the Mass General Hospital group, Dr. Brazier [assumed spelling], Dr. Cobb, they're disciples of myself, are working on the thing in a different way. In the first place, taking one place in the brain only, we have tried to analyze these waves by what we call the autocorrelation. To take the wave at one time, the wave a certain delay later, multiply them, and then see how that curve goes, how the average of that goes, as the displacement in time is increased. Now, we have observed that when we do that, first that the so-called alpha rhythm, which is about nine per second, shows up much more sharply than you would expect. And then we use the method that we use for analyzing what we would call time series of economics, which are very much like the phenomena of optics in physics, we find that this method of getting what we call the parallelogram, shows a wave that keeps up consistently with itself, although it occurs nine times a second, for one and probably two seconds. Well, in the first place, we found that [inaudible]. One rule in good scientific work is that you get a varied look into a thing if it isn't there. That if you find something that is there it just enables the power of your instrument to show, even though it shows [inaudible], you are under a moral obligation to increase your instrument so that it shows more clearly than [inaudible]. We did this, or we are doing this. We haven't done it yet, with this alpha rhythm, and then after we have done this work, then show this extremely sharp character of the alpha rhythm, which we did not expect to advance, which therefore forces us to study it, we saw that the methods we were using to do it, instead of being as new as we thought they were, were methods of the physicists that had been using extensively about 30 years ago. We found, in short, the tools we were using to study brain waves was, essentially, the same tool that Michelson had been using to study light waves. The interferometry. And if you remember, Michelson, by the aid of interferometer was able to measure the disc of the stars. He was able to take two mirrors 100 feet apart, reflect the light together, let it appear, observe the fringes, as they called the interferometer, by seeing how many fringes you got before they disappear, determined the dics diameter was a very unusual method to find physical measurements. What we are doing is figuratively the same thing with the brain waves, and we are finding that this correlogram we're using is nothing but an interferometer and that we are measuring something like the disc of a brain wave, and that it is fuller and sharper than we can measure it, even when it was smaller and sharper than what we had any right to measure. We may have renewed things because we're forced to measure new things, because we can. Then you come to a precise instrument, you may avoid using it, if you're convinced that it won't show anything even if you use it. But if you once can use the precise instrument, would show something that you haven't seen before, you'll never get rid of using it in the future. Because the thing you're looking for is there, you might as well look for it in each case and see if it's there. So that we've been using fine physical methods which we're using on economic statistics, five statistical methods, which were used in optics on brain waves, and they are at least showing a beginning of paying off. We're quite certain that this method is good because it shows something. It shows something that is much too consistent to be there by accident. If it had given us a miss, we could miss it in further work. But once that there was something there we can no longer assume it isn't there, and we are under a novel duty to study it. That will probably give us much more precise results in the study of brain waves in the future. What it will lead us to physiologically and pathologically, I don't know. But it shows so much that is so verifiable and so detailed that I shall be one of the most astonished people in the world if it doesn't show us a lot more which can be used physiologically, pathologically, and mechanically. Another thing that we're doing along the line of Gray Walters' work is studying several parts of the brain together, and we're finding that this brain wave has definite phase relations, surprisingly sharp, between the different parts of the brain. You can see clear delays of something like a 20th of a second or so between where starts as one, and where it starts in the other, which could only be found by instruments of this sort. Actually, without instruments of this sort, we might miss the alpha rhythm as it's called altogether. It could exist, but only be findable by instruments of this sort. Furthermore, the mathematics that goes with this new treatment in brain waves that we're developing enables us to give a clean meaning to the question which part of brain is driving which? And may ultimately lead us in the direction of investigating or suggesting anatomical and physiological connections between different parts of the brain corresponding between their firing relations in time. In other words, the type of mathematical analysis which happens to be precisely that, which is developing itself in other operational fields, as the standard technique of operational analysis, is also finding application in medicine in this field, I say medicine, in physiology in this field, but I'm one of those who believes that good physiology now means good pathology tomorrow and good therapeutics the day after tomorrow. I thank you very much.

[ Applause ]

>> You've been listening to the first in the 1953-54 Series of Lectures to the Laity. Our speaker tonight has been Dr. Norbert Wiener, Professor of Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Wiener's subject was the application of physics to medicine. The presiding German was Dr. Frank J. McGowan. The next lecture, to be given on Wednesday, November 18th at 8:30 p.m. will of course be open to the public. And again broadcast by your city station. The speaker will be Dr. Theodore Chevlovski [assumed spelling] of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research. The Laity Lectures, presented by the New York Academy of Medicine, as a free service to the people of New York City are broadcast by your city station, direct from the Academy Auditorium as a public service. We return you now to our studios in the Municipal Building. This is the Municipal Broadcasting System.

>> You try to get a physiologist to say that the nervous system is a chemical machine or an electrical machine, and you will find out the only answer he would give you is an electrochemical machine [laughter].

[ Background Sounds ]

>> Though the concept of negative causality, well, all that I can say is that we try to look the future back on the past, your techniques for such an examination will have to be exactly like those of the rabbits. You'll have to open boxes and let the rabbits run into them. Which, as I've said, is not a very economical technique to experimentation. We can only experiment one way effectively because we run only one way effectively, and it really doesn't matter too much whether the universe only runs one way effectively, because experimenting is a race between us and the universe, and not simply something that leaves the universe alone. I think that's the answer to that question. Define biophysics. I need a dictionary. Biophysics--there are really two things I'm talking about. The use of techniques which belong to science in general, in application to living and human beings as well as to what we ordinarily recognize as machines, but biophysics is also the study of phenomena already recognized in physics as a non-living material, as parts of the phenomena of living material. There are more pranks in that, by the way, than you might think. And the logic that I have here, a physical chemical colleague, but I'm going to ask him to give me a statement about one little question in biophysics. One of the things that you need in the study of an ordinary physical system is a study of the distribution of temperatures in it. In physical chemistry, temperature is an extremely important notion. One of the things, Dr. Chevlovski, I'd like you to help me out in is what can you mean by said to be as a local temperature in a living tissue? That's going to be very important, because I want to show that biophysics cannot be taken too accurately as a picture--as the same thing in detail as you'll have with physics of less organized systems, and the subject is full of pranks.

>> Dr. Wiener, perhaps I'll talk about it in two weeks [laughter], I know what you have in mind. Do you want to speak as the temperature of radiation?

>>

>> Professor Norbert Wiener: What I mean--what do you mean? How are you going to measure the temperature of a single small part of a cell, and does it mean anything?

>> Doesn't mean anything.

>> Professor Norbert Wiener: That's exactly the point. In other words, some of the physical consequences, there is some points of view, from which if you're discussing a single human cell and a small part of that cell, the nearest thing that you can get to a temperature in it would be something like the temperature of a steam boil. Is to the vision now concurring to him? Will homeostasis apply in communications health? Now, that seems to me to be a great variety of questions [laughter]. Can it be used as a means of administering health? Certainly. Is there such a thing as the health of the body politic from the point of view of communications? Also certainly. And I don't think it's--I think it needs to have its pulse taken at present [laughter], but is communication effectively acting as a way of communicating to the--contributing to the communicative integrity of the country? I have my doubts. I don't want to say it isn't. But I have my doubts. No. But. It does, a great deal of it, does involve that it can be said it is somewhat isolated entity. In other words, the degree of isolation that you need for that sort of a thing is the degree of isolation that every doctor postulates anyhow. That to a certain extent, he can control and isolate those factors that penetrate the body from outside to such an extent that he can study their relation with other factors in the body, if that couldn't be done, medicine would be a hopeless art. Do you recommend that more instruction in physics, and on the hermetic, should be included in medical school curricula? Excellent question, but I will not give a unique answer to it. I am saying that there are certainly people in work that is now called medical and physiological work, who can need, and more successes will need, more mathematics and physics than they're getting now. To what extent medicine can hold together as a single profession with these developments coming up, I don't know. But at least there will be branches of medicine which involve as much physics and chemistry and engineering and mathematics in our training in the future as shall we say psychoanalysis involves psychology now. That is, medicine is not going to stick, to be permanently for the future, the career of the man who carries a stethoscope in his hand, as engineering as the career of the man who carries a slide rule in his hip pocket. There's going to be a considerable group of young men in the future who carry both a stethoscope in their hand, and a slide rule in their hip pocket [laughter].

[ Applause ]

[ Inaudible Comments ]

>> Professor Norbert Wiener: The methodologist of science to include this and this study?

>> Yes.

>> Professor Norbert Wiener: It's by not to include this in this study, yes. It's by not to include this in this study. Yes. It's by no means rare. The point is that the scientist who is worth his salt has an uncanny skill in seeing the structure of an idea before it has attained to perfect definition. As a matter of fact, if he can't do that, he will never get to the later stage, where his idea does have a high degree of definition and he masters it. One of the most difficult arts to acquire and to understand of the scientist is to master the main points in the incompletely understood. But if you don't do it, you will not go very far in science. But as to rules to do it? How does a man write a piece of music that hasn't yet been written? How does he write it in the stage when it has not yet formed itself? How does a man write a novel when he doesn't know what he's going to say? How does a man paint a picture, but he hasn't finished it? This extreme problem, and it is one of the most difficult working problems of the scientist, to carry a pattern as a growing concern, before it has clarified itself in all its details, and the thing that one must know to some extent or another or one won't be a real scientist, but I'm afraid the only way to learn it is to be thrown up against a problem in his apprenticeship. But, this is not a rare experience. It is not rare for a good scientist to be righter than his own statement. Consider organic matter and inorganic matter--similar, but differently organized, yes, but I don't consider that differently organized--that doesn't mean there can be no organization in inorganic matter. The chief thing is the high degree of organization in organic matter. In organic matter, we can make machines and have structures, yes. We can make inorganic matter our structures, but what I'm talking about now is not only a theoretical difficulty, but a very practical difficulty. One of our great difficulties in handling organic matter is also one of our great difficulties in making efficient automata, making efficient machines of any sort, and that is just as I was speaking in connection with temperature, the study of organic matter, or even for the detailed control mechanical processes, or fine structure processes of inorganic matter, we need instruments themselves, a much finer structure than any we have, instruments that can read temperatures of a region of a thousandth of what which we can read a temperature now, instruments that can read concentrations of chemicals. Micro-instruments which can be made in a large number. I know that one of my colleagues, very apart of any suggestion of mine, Campbell, is trying to introduce into the chemical industry good methods of building [inaudible] instruments for process control, and in doing that, he is really approaching very close to the main problem of diffusely organic and inorganic matter. Which does not mean that organic and inorganic compounds, by the way. Is it largely a matter of accident that physics and medicine are integrating, or are there certain definable sociological causes? There are sociological causes, namely that it's becoming necessary for the doctors to be more aware of physical things, and it's becoming necessary for, as I've said, the physicists to take a less purely astronomical view of things, but these are not only sociological causes. There is one very familiar phenomenon in science that when a new tool is found, there's an urge to use it over the home front over which it can be used. And with new tools being found in both these fields, it is not at all surprising that somebody gets a hint from the new tool of one field, and tries to use it in another. So I think that the cause is both sociological and a general cause belonging to the development of science itself. Furthermore, the great synthesizing period of science, the 17th Century, many people thought Renault, in the detail of the 19th Century, that all the great questions have been answered, and nothing more would be left to the science of the future but measuring another decimal point. We know now that that isn't so. And therefore, we have more inducement than we ever had, to search for help in science wherever we can find it, to not [inaudible] in fields of science, and in short, I think the point of view of a scientist, such as [inaudible] is actually more in fashion now than it was 50 years ago. Is there any other?

>> I'm afraid ladies and gentleman, time will not permit any further questions. I'll now turn the meeting back to Dr. Harold Keyes.

[ Applause ]

>> Harold B. Keyes: Kindly remember that on November 18th, the succeeding lecture in this series will be given, and you can see by your program the title is the Relation of Electrochemistry to Medicine, by Dr. Theodore Chevlovski, who is on the platform tonight, and has helped in the interpretation of these questions. He is a member of the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research, and we can promise you a most interesting meeting. Goodnight.

[ Applause ]



