>> Good morning. Panel meeting will now convene. The subject is Public Health Aspects of Aging. I have one announcement before we introduce the speaker this morning. The moderator, whose name appears on the program, unfortunately is detained out of the country and I have been asked to take his place. My name is Kruse. I shall now like to introduce our distinguished speakers of the morning who are going to speak for one hour following which there will be written questions from the floor. May I introduce the first speaker who is Mr. Henry L. McCarthy, Commissioner of Welfare, City of New York, who has had a long interest in the subject of aging, and has carried on a large amount of activity in his department on this topic. He will bring to you particularly the social welfare aspects of this topic. Mr. McCarthy.

>> Thank you, Dr. Kruse, and greetings to all the doctors and friends who are here today. I don't know if this mic is working or if we need it. Can I be heard all the way?

>> Yeah.

>> I wonder if there's a--I'll be more comfortable and that you can hear me better if I stand. I want to hasten to reassure everybody that I am not going to speak for one hour. We are going to speak collectively for an hour and the assignment I have is 20 minutes. My watch says now 13 minutes after. I'll close well within the 20 minutes. My request to speak first was because we in the Welfare Department are concerned with the non-medical aspects and I thought logical progressions might be to move from that up through the generalized health interests which would be Dr. Baumgartner and then to Dr. Kolbe who will talk about the more specific interests which involved in the care of the aged who need hospital care. But we in the Welfare Department have a primary interest in the economic support of the aged and this is quite a large problem. As you know, we have varying estimates of the number of person over 65 years of age but a reliable figure seems to be somewhere around 600 to 650,000 in New York City. And it's surprising to a great many people to discover that somewhere around 50,000 of those only, only 50,000 are in need of assistance from our department. Now, this is a rather small percentage going to the magnitude of 8 percent, small compared to many other sections of the country. In the contrast, the most striking contrast I could give you would be to tell you that in the State of Louisiana, there are 72 percent of all persons over 65 who are receiving public assistance through the local welfare departments, so that--and the range is between our percentage of 8 percent and 72 with most of the states having considerably larger proportion than us and a great many of them approaching that 72 percent. The difference is accounted for by many factors, but a principal one is that in New York State, we have a rather strict relative responsibility provision in the law. There is a requirement in our state social welfare law that children are responsible for the support of their parents and their grandparents and we enforce that provision. Necessarily, we are bound to enforce it. And if a younger person refuses to support his parent, we have a legal process by which we take him into court and force him. Sometimes, this is embarrassing and sometimes it seems a little unfair because we run up against situations like this where a man deserted his family when their children were small and never contributed a cent to the support of the children or the mother. The mother has to go to work and raise those children, does a good job of it and the children grew up to be decent citizens, and marry, and have family of their own and supporting them. And then all of the sudden, the father, who deserted the family 25 year sago, shows up as an indigent, old person over 65 years of age and applies to our department for assistance and we find out he has two sons. This is a real case. It came to my attention just recently. And the sons say, "No, we won't support that man. He did nothing for us. He did nothing for our mother." And yet we have to take them into court and force them in the courts to agree to support. Well, usually, in this kind of case, the judges are quite understanding and they try not to hit the sons with an inordinate amount of contribution, but the law does require that they contribute something up to the limit of their capacity. Well, I don't want to debate the merits of this law except to point out that the law does exist and that the law does account for the fact that we have relatively few, compared to the rest of the country, relatively few of our aged people who are in need of public assistance through the Welfare Department. Now, the economic problem, therefore, is not a heavy one on us. But we are concerned with other than economic problems. We're concerned with the happiness of the older person and we're very conscious of the fact that the older person needs something more than economic support. As we suggested, most of them are able to take care of themselves or are being taken care of economically, but not all of them are being taken care of in terms of the real needs which they have, which are social needs. And the principal social deficiency that exists for the older person is the fact that they are unwanted, unwanted in industry and unwanted or they feel that they are unwanted in the community, and sometimes they feel that they're unwanted in their own families. And this, of course, results in a distinct trauma on the older person. It makes him feel alone and makes him feel lonely. It makes him feel ignored and it makes him feel very unhappy, and this unhappiness reflects itself in a variety of ways. It reflects itself in a dejection and depression which if he happens to be living with his family, with his sons or daughters or grandchildren, can be very harmful, harmful to the peace and happiness not only of himself but of his entire family. And this becomes a social problem. I think everyone in this room probably knows some family that is terribly hampered by the existence on young family which is terribly hampered by the presence of an older person, a mother, a father, mother-in-law, father-in-law in the household who makes life pretty miserable either for the wife or the husband. And this becomes a source of conflict within the family and this contributes to a lot of our miseries in the city and more specifically to the breakdown of families and to the bad effect upon the children who are being raised in that family. Someone has said if you want healthy children you must have healthy grandparents around. And so, we have a real stake in trying to correct this condition. This has to do with providing things for the older people to do, interests to occupy them, places for them to go and activities for them to take part in. And so, we in the department have felt that along with our provision of economic security, financial support that we can legitimately spend public money to enlarge upon the opportunities for recreation and other healthful activities for the aged. And so, we have been pioneers in our department and in this city and, for that matter, in the country in the establishment of publicly supported day centers, where the aging people can come from 9 to 5, five days a week, as often as they want, the full five days if they desire or less than that. And at these centers, we will provide not just a place to come and sit and associate with and talk with their fellow aged people but we'll provide things which will stimulate their interest and in which they can take part. Now, the best way to illustrate the value of this kind of operation seems to me is to give you a look-see at one of our centers. I would prefer it if I could take this whole room full of people and take you to the nearest one which, in this case, would be the Hodson Center in the Bronx, I guess, or we could take you the Sirovich Center on Second Avenue between 12th and 13th Street. And by the way, I invite any who are interested to come and visit those centers and see for yourselves what goes on there. But if we were to get in the car now and go down to Second Avenue and visit the Sirovich Center, you'd find that there was a lot of things going on. By the way, I forgot the nearest one and I suddenly see a baleful glance from the staff members who are associated with the nearest one which is only right over here on the 109th Street, a few blocks from here. Maybe that would be the quickest place for anybody to go. It's walking distance. But if you went to a 109th Street or to Sirovich, either one, you find the activity. The usual way I describe it is to say in the vernacular "the joint is jumping." Because if you walk the next day, that's being Wednesday, at Sirovich you find the orchestra rehearsing which they do three times a week, Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. And these are musicians who spent their lifetime as professional musicians, and they're all 68, 70, 72, 74, and I think the oldest member of the orchestra is 84 years of age. And that orchestra, made up of about 12 or 15 members with different kinds of instruments, rehearse religiously and this is something that keeps this older men so completely occupied and so completely aroused and stimulated that we never hear any complaints from them. And then the coldest day in winter with snow and ice, you'll find them getting there by hook or crook and through all kinds of difficult transportation to make sure they are present for the rehearsals. And of course, they rehearse for a purpose. That is, in order to be able to perform at different kinds of functions. And we in the department have been very happy to have them on many occasions, official occasions that the department celebrate and the orchestra comes and plays for us. And they play at benefits and they play at hospitals and play at all kinds of civic affairs. Well, the value to the older people who belong to that orchestra is incalculable because they don't think of themselves as useless people. They have a focal point for their interest. They have something around which they build their lives, something which occupies them in terms of their thinking, in terms of their conversation, in terms of their getting up and going some place in the morning, having something to do and their planning for where the orchestra is going to play next week, or what new piece they're going to rehearse in their regular Monday, Wednesday, and Friday rehearsals. But that isn't all. We have other things going on there too. If you went to the second floor, you'd find people painting, doing ceramics, doing dressmaking, making millinery, all kinds of woodwork, all kinds of craft occupations. And then, you'd find discussion groups, and you'd find classes. We even have a class in arithmetic. Somebody expressed a desire one day and said he had never learned to count, never learned to add and subtract and divide and multiply. Some of the older people had limited--have had limited opportunity. And then, so it was suggested that we have a class in arithmetic, because we had a high school, a former high school teacher of mathematics in the group. And so, they solicited people to come in to this class and they found 30 people. Among the 250 or 300 who attend daily, on the average, 30 people who wanted that kind of a class. And so, there's no limit of what interests the people can have. It can range from music to dramatic to discussion to craft work to arithmetic or algebra even. In these things, we have felt more than recreation. We don't like to describe this program as a recreation program only, we think of it as a mental health program. And there are some, there are some significant data available on the value of this in retarding deterioration and the best thing we know about it so far is something that Dr. Rusk did for us a few years ago. He looked at the composition of a population that attended the center in the Bronx or the Hodson Day Center, and took that population and their age distribution, and the length of time which they had been attending the center, and made a projection of the probable, predictable commitments to mental hospitals that might have occurred in that group over that period of time. And as I recall the figures, the number who might have been--and as far as the averages in the population with concern to such a group, the number would might have been committed would have been about 40. And actually within the time span of the study, only one person was found necessary to commit to a mental hospital. This seems to be pretty good evidence that this kind of program keeps people mentally alert and mentally healthy and does retard the deterioration which caused a commitment.

[ Pause ]

And this, of course, is a great money-saver for the community as well as being a great boon to the individuals concerned. The money saving comes from the fact that we estimate the cost of operating these day centers at about $30 per year per person. Or as I have all kinds of estimates of the cost of hospital care in mental hospitals, but some people think that $20 a day is probably the true cost of such an operation. And when we compare $20 a day with $30 a year, certainly we can justify the extension and expansion of these day centers. Well, the real motivation that we have in setting up these day centers and my hope is that we will be able to expand them and that hope is based upon a real plan to get state assistance for this program because up to now it's financed only by the city. But with the new administration's emphasis on the problems of the aging and as we all know right this week, they're having a conference and all body on it, I'm very hopeful that we'll get a state reimbursement, so the city would be able if we got 50 percent reimbursement and I think it's a justifiable expense. The city would be able, perhaps, to double its centers, and then to expand from there, because when you think that the centers now service only about 6,000 people and I told you that--reminded you that there are 650,000 people over 65 or, perhaps, a million over 60 in this city, you can see that there may be many tens of thousands more who could profit by, and the community could profit by the expansion of these days center operations. Now, our real motivation has to do with keeping people in the community as long as possible, and this one of the ways in which we think we can help to keep all the people in the community. We realize when we look at the waiting lists that are confronting every home for the aged in the city, whether it'd be Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, or publicly operated, we realized that we'll never be able to build enough or maintain enough buildings to take care of the aged in the institutional care. And that it behooves us to do everything we possibly can to postpone the date at which people may have to go into institutions and to curtail it as much as possible too. Well, that means a simple formula upon we should operate is keeping people in community as long as possible. We have several different approaches to that, but one of the important ones is to develop the day centers as a place where people can enjoy life even if they have to go back to a lonely four walls or living all by themselves in the evening. At least, they have something to do during the day, to take the place of the time they used to spend going to a job. But other things we are interested into. We're interested in the expansion of our homemaker service for the aged because we find that in some instances, the older people can continue to live in their own small quarters if they have a little bit of help in the way of homemaker service. And we do have in the department now a 115 homemaker trained domestic people, whom we send out to families to do the task that the older people can't do. Now, actually, I shouldn't deceive you by saying that that whole 115 or suggesting that that whole 115 homemakers is devoted to this particular segment of our work. Actually, only about 20 of those 115 are now assigned to working for the aged. But even those 20 do a tremendous job and I think have been able to assist older people who can't take care of the cleaning of their homes, for example, a heavy cleaning, I think it has helped them to stay in those homes. I'm asking for more homemakers in my next budget and I'm also asking that the state increase or also participate in this operation because this, too, is a city-financed operation. Well, if we expand homemaker service, expand day care, there are few other things we can do. We can hope that the--and we can support the efforts of the Hospital Department and the Health Department to increase the home care facilities. That would be discussed by the other speakers, but certainly the Department of Welfare, through its membership on the Interdepartmental Health Council, should support in every way possible expansion of that service which will also help older people in their own homes for a longer period of time. Then we would want to move over into the development of boarding homes and nursing homes. At a certain stage and for great many older people where they can't take care of themselves, it is necessary to find a decent home for them. Now sometimes, this doesn't involve nursing care, it does not involve medical care beyond the occasional or systematic home care visits of the Hospital Department, but we can set up boarding homes or we can find boarding homes and pay a decent rate for the same kind of care that we expect in our foster homes for children. In other words, what we hope to expand, and are now doing, is looking for more foster homes for the aged as well as foster homes for children. I think you know that we have 16,000 children in foster homes in this city and we very carefully study these foster homes and study their parents, and we try to find out whether they will be people who have a real interest in children so the children would get good care in those homes. Well, I think we ought to do just about same thing with the aged. We ought to try to find people who have an interest in the aged and will take good care of them. At the present time we're paying $94 and 50 cents per month as our fee for such a boarding home care as we--if we place an older person who doesn't need medical care or much medical care or nursing care in such a boarding home, we will pay $94.50. Whether that's adequate or not to such would get the kind of a real interest on the part of the foster parents of the aged whom we would be asking to take on this job, I'm not sure. I have asked our department to restudy this and to discuss it with the state, and it may well be that for the kind of care we're looking for we ought to be willing to pay a little bit more. However, we have succeeded in getting several hundred boarding homes where older persons, one, or two, or three, or even four older persons can move in and can be taken care of on this plan. Then of course we step on from there to the group which doesn't need a hospital care but which does need some continuing nursing care. And there we have had a tremendous mushrooming-growth of nursing homes, most of them under private auspices of course and profit-making operations in this city. And we have developed a cooperative plan with these nursing homes whereby we pay a minimum of $150 a month, an intermediary rate of $180 and a maximum rate of $200. When we get to that $200 rate it means that people--they are taking care of people who are really pretty much bedridden, incontinent and in need of maximum service. These rates we think are fairly liberal. As a matter fact, I don't know of any other city in the United States that pays as much for this kind of service as we do in New York City and for this care, it seems to me--for this rate it seems to me we are entitled to insist upon the best possible care. And we have been working very closely with the Nursing Home Association in an effort to make sure that standards--good standards are adopted and observed. And of course your new hospital code does set up for the rigid standards for the nursing homes. The nursing homes, I might say in my experience have been constantly improved over last few years but I think it also calls for constant vigilance on the part of the public authorities both the hospital department and ourselves to see to it that the standards are maintained. Certainly we cannot allow older people who have medical needs--continuing medical or nursing needs to be victimized or exploited. The temptation to do so, of course, exists in the minds of and in the practices of certain kinds of nursing home proprietors. But the--I think that we have pretty well weeded out those who are most predatory and I can pretty well say, as of this moment, that the general practices among the nursing homes in New York City which we are using for Welfare Department clients is on a pretty high level and we intend to keep it there by recourse to all the enforcement resources that we have. From there, of course we go to the need for expansion of institutional care on a much larger scale. For a large number of people who fall into a category where they need custodial care, where there are not private facilities available and where they don't fall exactly into the category of either nursing home care or boarding home care. I can foresee that we will have in this community and the need for and I can foresee that we will have eventually homes for the--custodial homes for the aged in which the service rendered will be comparable with that which is offered now by the religious groups which have setup the very wonderful homes for the aged now operated under the auspices of the Catholics, Protestant, and Jewish agencies. But the need is expanding the agencies involved are not able to add to their facilities fast enough to take care of all those who need and it seems to mean that this may be anticipated as a proper area for expansion of the public service. I have certainly don't think that even myself or Commissioner Baumgartner or Commissioner MacLean have any interest in expanding our empires but I think perforce because of the great numbers of older people who are going to be living longer, that the demand for custodial care will be very great. Along with that we'll come something which Dr. Kolbe will discuss I'm sure and that is need for public home infirmary care. Well, I think I have probably suggested that the problem of the aging is not something that we have suddenly begun to think about. It's something that has been in the forefront of my mind and the minds of the staff of the Welfare Department as long as I have been with the department which will be six years from next January and a lot of spadework had been done long before I came with the department. And I anticipate that if I and the staff are going to be around for another six years that one of the main preoccupations we will have to face and have is continuing expansion of care for the aged on all of these fronts. And I just wish that my words could be heard and then those of the other speakers this morning by the people in Albany, who will have to approach the legislature because it is my conviction of the City of New York cannot do this job alone, should not be required to do this job alone. We must and should have a state assistance and I think that has been too long deferred, it's long overdue and I think this should be the year in which we get recognition that the problem of the aging is not just a local problem but a problem involving the interest of the whole state. Certainly the state's interest in curtailing the number of mental institutions which we must built and maintain ought to concern them to a point where they would say that money spent for prevention that we are suggesting here in New York City, will be well spent and will be repaid by the savings of account by not having to build more mental institutions as state expense exclusively in the future. I think that tell us all that I either have time for or what is said to this point Dr. Bruce.

>> Thank you Mr. McCarthy. That was a most interesting presentation of the activities of the Welfare Department. Another impressive list of activities in behalf of the elderly. Will you please hold your questions until the end of the presentations by the panel members, but I would suggest, perhaps, if you might want to make notes as we go along and have your questions well formulated so that they may be presented at the end of the hour. The next member of the panel to speak will be Commissioner Leona Baumgartner, who has a wide experience in the field of public health and she, too, brings to this problem an interest that extends over considerable period of time. She will--I suspect and then talk in terms of the public health aspects more technically and it is a great pleasure to present Commissioner Baumgartner to you.

>> Thank you very much and isn't easier to have stand up and talk, does that seem better? You can hear? All right. Fine. I am--Dr. Kruse is doing exactly that and what's going on [inaudible] meeting along and be sure that we won't run over time I'm going to do--there's something I don't very often do and that's why I'm stick to a text. We have had tried to outline in rather a broad way the problems of the public health aspects of the aging.

[ Pause ]

And have not discussed as Commissioner McCarthy has specific activities we're a balanced panel up here partially because we work together on this problem right along so this is done somewhat by design. In recent years, more and more attention is being paid to the many problems of aging in our society. Among these, the public health aspects of aging loom large. The question might will be asked, why all about this--what about all this concern about aging. Haven't we always help people around? Haven't we always been dealing with problems of the aging? Hasn't the toll of chronic disease and disability always been greatest among our older inhabitants? I think that our present increased concern with the problems of the aging stems from three developments. The answers obviously to these questions above are yes. But the three developments are first, that older people constitute an ever-growing proportion of our population. Second, changing social conditions make it impossible to deal with the problem of aging in the same fashion that we as individuals and as community have dealt with them in the past. And third, there's been a growing emphasis on the concepts of prevention and rehabilitation as applied to chronic disease and disability among- young and old alike. In my remarks, I would like to give some consideration to each of these three factors in turn. The trend toward an aging populations in this city can most readily be appreciate by reference to a number simple of facts obtained in the 1930 and the 1950 censuses, and by a look at the experts estimates of the age distribution of New York City's population in 1970. It is what lies ahead of us. In 1930, there were 264,000 people 65 years of age and older living in the City. These individuals represented 3.8 percent of the total population. By 1950, the number of persons 65 years of age and older had increased to 605,000. The group now constituted 7.7 percent, not 3.8 but 7.7 percent of our total population. And it is estimated that there will be 1 million and 50,000 persons of this age living in New York City in 1970 representing then 12.3 percent of the population. It is quite evident that both the absolute and the relative numbers of old people and in our midst has increased very markedly within the very short period of 20 years. This trend can be expected to continue for many years to come. Accurate data on the prevalence of chronic disease and disability in New York City or elsewhere in the United States, for that matter, are not really available. It is possible, however, to arrive at informed estimates, estimates that are probably valid within broad limits on the basis of the National Health Survey data, now, however, almost 20 years old. This survey revealed that half of the population, 65 years of age and older was suffering from some chronic disease or disability. Eighteen percent of the older population had a disabling chronic illness that lasted one week or more during any one year. The duration of disability among this 18 percent of the older population was 191 days in a year. Six percent of these aged were invalids another 12 percent were disabled for at least one week during the year, because of their chronic illness. Duration of disability for the latter group was 96 days a year on the average, whereas the former, by definition, were disabled for 12 months on the entire year. All of these figures mean that we can assume that of our current population of older persons in New York City approximately 375,000 have some chronic disease or disability, 45,000 older persons in New York City are chronic invalids and an additional 90,000 experienced at least one week of disability during the year because of chronic illness. The average duration disability among this latter group is about three months. Therefore, about 10 percent of our older population or 75,000 individuals are incapacitated on any one day because of chronic illness in this group. What does this mean in terms the need for in the use of facilities for medical and rehabilitation care? The absolute needs of this group of persons for medical care have again never been measured accurately. We do have as an indication of the use of some of the facilities for medical care however a joint study by the Departments of Health and Hospitals in cooperation with the Russell Sage Foundation just published in recent months which revealed that 18 percent of the discharges from the municipal hospitals of New York City during a six-months period in 1952 were of persons 65 years of age and older. Since older persons tended to have longer stays in hospitals than younger persons, the percentage of bed occupancy by older persons was even higher than the discharge rate. It is probably a conservative estimate to say that one in every four beds in our municipal hospitals is occupied by a person 65 years of age or older. The most common diagnosis in this group of older individuals were arteriosclerotic heart disease, malignant neoplasms, senile psychoses, psychosis with cerebral arteriosclerosis, vascular lesions affecting the central nervous system, hypertensive disease each accounting for at least 5 percent of the primary diagnosis. Many additional figures could be cited to point up these facts in much the same or a slightly different way. For our purposes this morning they are quite unnecessary since that is clear from the evidence that, one, the numbers of aged persons in the population have increased and will continue to increase markedly. Two, the prevalence of chronic illness, and more particularly the prevalence of the chronic--disabling chronic illness is high among the aged. And three, the use by older persons of such facilities for medical care as our municipal hospitals is out of all proportion with their numbers. We might not direct our attention to the changing social scene and its implications for the aged and their problems. Perhaps the most important element here is the change in our family structure to which Commissioner McCarthy has essentially already have something to say. For all practical purposes, we no longer have the three generation households which were common at the turn of the century. This results in part from the prevailing social values and in part from housing limitations. Among the many questionable accomplishments of industrialization in technological progress must be counted the decrease in the economic importance of the aged and their concomitant loss of social stages in our culture. As for the effects of housing, the small apartments in our multiple-dwelling units and they often even smaller modern private houses do not provide space for grandpa or grandma, especially if they are sick. A factor of equal importance has been the development and progress of the medical sciences. In the last 50 years, medicine has become more and more complex. The family practitioner can no longer treat almost to all of his patients in their homes as he did 50 years ago and still be giving the best of available medical care. In many cases, good medical care requires the use of a hospital, with its many facilities in terms of personnel and equipment. But hospital care is costly. Can our older people pay for it? By and large, they cannot. Commissioner McCarthy has already pointed out some of these. The source of income, I believe for some 39 percent of New York City's older people, is old aged and survivors insurance. The average pension here is $60 a month. And I know a number of these people also receive pensions from industrial pension plans. But even in such cases, the combined monthly pensions are only about a $120 a month. Some of these people of course have savings. However, the numbers with any substantial savings cannot be very large. About 30 percent of the older population is either still in the labor force or dependent on a husband or wife in the labor force. About a quarter of our older people are supported by relatives or derive their income from other sources than in common. Seven percent of the aged are on old age assistance. This then is the general picture of the economic status of all the aged. Here is a large group of persons whose needs for medical care far exceed those of other age groups in the population, while their ability to purchase such care is less than that of other groups. If, as I believe, public health is an organized social action necessary to protect, promote, and maintain the health of the people. And medical care for the aged is clearly a public health problem not necessarily may I say a health department program--a problem but a public health problem. It cannot be expected that any great numbers of our older people will be able to meet their needs for medical care if they are left entirely to their own devices. The community through its official and its voluntary agencies must step in and render assistance. The sheer weight of the numbers of the chronically ill among the ages has emphasized the needs at two opposite ends of the evolution of the disease process. One is the need for prevention and the other the need for rehabilitation. The prevention of chronic illness has been advocated as an ideal solution to the major health problems of the aged. The very idea is both intellectually and emotionally satisfying. Obviously the control of infectious diseases through specific preventive measures has paid off well. It is considered by many to be the traditional province of public health and by some to be its only problems. We can point with pride to the magnificent accomplishments of public health as I've said in the prevention of the infectious diseases. Now, if we can do--if we could do as a society, the same thing from chronic diseases that would seem to be the ideal approach. Traditionally, our programs of prevention who have had a double-barreled approach. First we've attempted disease prevention and its true sense as we do for example by vaccination against smallpox or by the proper control of our water supplies to prevent typhoid fever or by case finding in treatment of infectious syphilis and tuberculosis in order to prevent the spread of the disease to others. But often our progress has all--progresses--programs have also had another objective namely secondary prevention. I would like to call other control. At the same time, that we have focused our attention upon on early case finding and treatment of syphilis and tuberculosis with the objective of spreading--of preventing the spread of these diseases to others. We have succeeded in diminishing disability and death from these diseases in the individuals whom we have treated. In other words, we attempt not only to prevent the initial onset of disease but also to prevent its progression when it occurs. At present, we do not have the scientific know how necessary for the primary prevention of the vast majority of the chronic diseases and must wait upon the fruits of fundamental research for progress in this field. Many believe, however, that we do possess techniques for secondary prevention or control of some of these illnesses. For the purposes of this discussion now I might site one of these approaches. Perhaps the one that comes to mind first is the periodic health examination. Now, periodic health examinations were first advocated by the Dobell in London in 1863 almost a hundred years ago. The first published article in this country advocating periodic health examinations was written by Gould of Philadelphia in 1900. Some 10 years later the idea gained organizational substance in the formation of the Life Extension Institute. The principal for purpose of this organization was and is to provide periodic health examinations. In the middle '20s a nationwide drive for periodic health examinations was undertaken. It have the backing and interest of such organizations as the American Medical Association, the National Health Council, the New York Tuberculosis and Health Association, the New York County Medical Society. Since the early '40s the periodic health examination now under the name--for example of cancer detection examination is taken a new hold on the public imagination. But despite this long experience I regret to say we still do not know whether a case finding and treatment in the pre symptomatic stages of disease either diminishes disability or postpones death for the majority of the chronic diseases. I do not mean to imply by what I just said but I think periodic health examinations of adults are valueless. On the contrary, I think their value in relation to a few diseases has been shown and I feel that eventually we should be able to prove their value in others. But what I would like to stress is the need for a scientific approach to these problems. Isn't it about time we setup ourselves to find out where the truth lies instead of just taking Horace Dobell's word for it from 1865. It maybe that some parts in the periodic health examination for the example are more productive than others more productive not in terms of what we find but in terms of what we can do about what we find. It maybe that the more rapid and less costly screening devices such as multiphasic screening can accomplish almost equal objectives or it maybe that for some diseases the diagnosis and treatment of early symptomatic disease will control such disease as effectively as its discovery and treatment in the presymptomatic stage. The answer to these questions and to many others of like nature are absolutely essential to us if we are to plan and undertake programs for the prevention of chronic disease in an intelligent fashion. We in this New York City Department of Health propose to work ourselves and enlist to support of others to find some of these answers. The scientific approach to the problems of the prevention of chronic illness has been too long delayed. But I have had to say about rehabilitation what I have to say about rehabilitation shall very brief.

[ Pause ]

Clinical experience has proved the value of rehabilitation. There are not many today who question the concept that adequate treatment includes so called rehabilitation, but the problem is how to get this done. What is the social machinery necessary to make the rehabilitation available to that large group of chronically ill, elderly people who could benefit but are now not benefiting from rehabilitation? Here is an area of administration or social research, if you will, that must be pursued before the community can setup large scale service programs. In conclusion, I would like to emphasize is almost self evident points. The proportion of elderly people in our population is increasing. The prevalence of chronic illness among the aged is high. Changing social conditions and medical progress have increased the need for institutional care of chronic--of the chronically ill. The aged as a group are in a poor economic position to purchase medical care. The prevention of chronic disease must be approached with more than good intentions. It must be placed on a scientific frame. The social machinery for rehabilitation of the chronically ill must be developed. These are some, Mr. Chairman, of the public health aspects of aging.

[ Applause ]

>> Thank you very much Commissioner Baumgartner. I think you are all impressed as am I at the large scope for the picture that has been painted for us. First that Commissioner McCarthy in the field of social welfare. Secondly by Commissioner Baumgartner in the field of public health. There still remains one part of the canvas to be filled in. Our scheduled speaker for the morning was Commissioner of Hospitals Dr. Basil MacLean, who unfortunately is unable to be with us but sends his regrets. We are most fortunate, however, in having on this occasion one of his valuable [inaudible], Dr. Henry W. Kolbe, who was his Director of Medical and Hospital Services in the Department of Hospitals. And Dr. Kolbe will present to us the third aspect of the public health aspects of aging namely that of a hospitalization features.

>> I would like to mention that it is very appropriate that we have the three departments of health, welfare, and hospitals represented on this panel because these three departments during the past two years have been working as a team through an agency that has been setup known as the Interdepartmental Health Council. Recently, to this group has been added the Mental Hygiene Board. It was find as I discuss the problems of the company--the problems of hospitalization with regards to the largely the ever increasing number of the aging citizens has occurred to us that they're moving necessary some repetition. I will repeat some of the things that Dr. Baumgartner has mentioned and perhaps some of the things that Commissioner McCarthy has mentioned. The three departments are so closely intertwined in this particular problem that we really cannot separate them completely. I think everyone here is aware of the fact that hospitals are facing the critical situation, the cost of the increase on the number of the aged, both relativity and absolutely in our population. In order to understand what the situation is I think we might say a few words about the extent of the problem. Some of these statistics may be known to you and some have been mentioned this morning. I will just quote from two reports that we have and a two studies we have carried out in the Department of Hospitals within recent years. In 1952 a study shown that of all discharges of the municipal hospitals, 16 percent for over 65 years of age. Here's another figure that perhaps is even more significant. This study was made in 1955 and then covered all patients except the obstetrical and pediatric cases who are discharged from 15 general municipal hospitals. And this shows a figure of 26.2 percent of individuals over 65 years of age. When Dr. Baumgartner mentioned that it is a safe in fact, it is considered of the state that one out of every four beds in our municipal hospitals is occupied by a person over 65 years of age. That is undoubtedly a true statement. In fact, it is a true statement as of today. Five years from now and 10 years from now, the ratio will rise even more. The most prevalent conditions for which patients are treated in the aged group, I am sure are known to all of you and have been mentioned. They are important to keep in mind because in planning our facilities new and the expansion of all facilities as well as the development of programs, we must know the disease entities that we are treating. I wish to draw your attention particularly to one type of condition which is receiving ever increasing attention and that is senile psychosis and psychosis with cerebral arteriosclerosis. That is mentioned as one of the most common conditions for which patients are--patients over 65 years of age are treated. It's amongst the most five most common conditions. I will say more about this subject subsequently. Another important factor that one must think of it depends of hospitalization of the aged is the fact that the aged stay in our hospitals and for a much longer periods of time than the younger population age groups. I'd like to give you this figure to bear out that statement. Only 8 percent of patients under 55 years of age stayed more than one month in a care of a general hospital while 23 percent of patients 65 to 74 years of age and even more of those 75 years of age and older remained longer than a month. In other words, not only are we receiving larger numbers of aged people into our hospitals but the people we are receiving are staying a much longer period of time. Due to advances in medicine and surgery during the last decade we have gone in long waves towards protecting the population against acute disease. But so far, chronic disease remains our biggest problem. And it's a problem that is increasing in importance every day particularly as the number of people in our population increase in terms of age groups. Actually, however, the problems with the regard to the aged begin when the patient is ready for discharge. We can treat the patient while he needs hospitalization. We have the facilities for that. And our problem really begins when he is ready to go home or to be taken care of in some other facility. These are the various problems that arise at the time of discharge. Socioeconomic factors would prevent discharge of the patient to his home. This has been discussed by Commissioner McCarthy and also by Dr. Baumgartner and I'm sure you know quite a bit about this. And I will not say more on this subject. The second facility that is available to the aged is the home care program. The home care program is becoming a more important thing every year. It is a problem that is spreading all over the United States. The home care program provides a second medical service and nursing service to a patient who has been in a hospital whether it is a long term hospital or a general care hospital who no longer needs those services of a hospital but does require attention both medical and nursing which can be given to him in his home. The Department of Hospitals has approximately 20,000 beds, all total, both for general care cases and for special cases. We carry at all times approximately 2,000 patients on home care. I wish you had realize the significance of this because only a matter of 10 years ago the majority of these cases would have been kept in the hospital and kept for a long periods of time up to four, five, six, seven years in our long term institutions. These patients are in their own homes and they are being treated. They receive medical service. They receive nursing service. And they are returned to the hospital whenever an acute phase requires hospitalization. This program will be developed further. At the present time, we have a home care program in all of our general care hospitals with the exception of one. We propose to expand this program to include the new hospital in the Bronx, the Abraham Jacobi Hospital which will be opened very shortly. We also will expand it to include the two cancer hospitals and that is the James Young Hospital and the Bird Coler Hospital. And we also wish to extend it to the Bird S. Coler Hospital. It is important also to keep in mind that the cost of taking care of a home care patient is approximately one-tenth of the cost of taking care of the same patient in a general care hospital. What are the other facilities we have available for the patient, the aged patients who is ready for discharge? Well, we may transfer him to special long term facilities. I will mention three of those facilities as far as the Department of Hospitals is concerned. We have Bird S. Coler Hospital with approximately 2,000 beds, the Goldwater Memorial Hospital with 1,500 beds, and then we have the--a custodial institution, Farm Colony, with almost 1,200 beds. These institutions are filled to capacity at all times and the need for this type of service is obvious as one reduce the entire situation. Another disposition of the case who is ready for discharge is a transfer to nursing homes and Commissioner McCarthy has gone into that quite thoroughly. I merely wish to mention that there are over 5,000 beds in nursing homes in New York City and they also are filled to capacity most of the time. There has been considerable expansion of these facilities in the community. And I dare say that this expansion will continue. Now the question comes up, how can we meet the problem? Well, certainly we have the answer here. The problem will be met after a considerable study. There will not be a bit of work in one department or two departments or three departments. There will have to be a community effort which will bring in all elements just a study in this particular problem. I will merely speak of the problem as it affects hospitals in general. It is very obvious that the pattern of hospital care has been changing particularly during the past 10 years. I speak specifically of the general care hospital. Our concept for the general care hospital only a short time ago was that it was a place where the acute patient was treated and then after receiving definitive treatment was discharged.

[ Noise ]

>> Now from the figures I have given you and also the figures that Dr. Baumgartner has given you, it is very obvious that more and more of our beds are being taken up with a long term case. In other words, we must plan our hospitals differently from the way we have been planning them in the past. We must think in terms not of acute illness, not in terms of general care and not in terms of long term or chronic disease care. We must think in terms of a patient who is ill and must be treated regardless of age and regardless of disease. Specialty hospitals are decreasing in number for this very reason. In all our new facilities which will be opened shortly, I'd like to mention them briefly, the Jacobi Hospital, the Bronx, the Elmhurst Hospital in Queens, the new Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn as well as the new Metropolitan Hospital which has recently opened in Manhattan. We have taken cognizance of this changing pattern of hospital care. In this way, in order to take care of the long term case certain facilities are needed which were not included in the general care hospital of 10 or 20 years ago. The urgent need for rehabilitation facilities and all its aspects has long been recognized. In all our new institutions we have put this into effect. We have not confined our activities in this field just to new facilities. Our older institutions have also been provided with rehabilitation facilities. This applies particularly to the larger institutions. Now, I would like to make clear when I speak of a hospital which has all the facilities to take care of all types of cases regardless of aging and disease, there are certain limitations. A small hospital obviously cannot have the facilities nor it cannot possibly treat the long term case over a long period of time. Make the small hospital may take care of the acute phase of chronic disease but cannot carry a patient for a long period of time. It does--If it did so, in a short time, all its beds would be taken up. And it could not fulfill its responsibility to the community to take care of the acute general type of case. But certainly, all our larger hospitals, all our medical centers, should be planned for a comprehensive care to the patient who is ill. A short while ago I mentioned to you the fact that senile psychosis is one of our major problems. What is happening now is that a patient with certain signs of cerebral arteriosclerosis is being rushed to a mental institution, usually at Bellevue Hospital or Kings County Hospital, and shortly thereafter is committed to a state institution. It is very definite in our mind that the majority that these cases do not require and it is very unjust to commit them to state institutions. This is particularly important in view of the chronic over crowding of state mental institutions and the need to build more and more such institutions. We must meet the problem by a long-term care probably--we must meet this problem by taking care of these cases wherever we can in the general hospital. And also we must develop programs of prevention in order to avoid the ever increasing percentage of aged people who develop the symptoms of senile psychosis. It is a problem that has not been met. We are barely in need and see what time to discuss it and to realize its implications. This has been discussed by Commissioner McCarthy and also by Dr. Baumgartner. I just mentioned it to you because it is one of the major problems that we have to contend with in the Department of Hospitals. I would just like to emphasize a few points in conclusion. The first thing is that we must orient our general care hospitals in order to meet the comprehensive needs of the ill, regardless of disease and regardless of age. Secondly, we must develop special facilities and train the necessary technical personnel to provide the special services required for the care of the aged in the general care hospital as well as in the chronic disease or a long term institution. I wish to emphasize again the necessity for the development of a specific program for the care of the senior outpatient and suitable facilities to avoid unnecessary commitment to state mental institutions. And finally, merely to emphasize or to restate a subject discussed by Commissioner McCarthy, I can envision the expansion of our public home infirmary care program because we know that when we deal with people in the aged group, we are usually dealing, in the majority of cases, with medical indigent patients or indigent patients. With all efforts to treat them in the community at a content can accomplish no more and it is necessary to provide other facilities for them, we probably will have to do so in public home infirmary care institutions. It will be necessary and advisable that these facilities be closely integrated with proper medical facilities operated, I presume, by the Department of Hospitals. I've tried to give you a very brief and I think an incomplete outline of what our problems are in this particular field. I really wish to emphasize again that we do have an Interdepartmental Health Council which comprised representation of the three departments represented today, as well as the Mental Hygiene Board. The problem of the aged, I think, is the major problem of the Department of Hospitals and it's a problem that not only we must meet but the entire community must meet.

[ Applause ]

>> Thank you, Dr. Kolbe, for your exposition on the hospitalization aspects of the care of the elderly. And now we come to the question period. But fist I would like to make an announcement. All those going to the Goldwater Memorial, this afternoon, please see Dr. Ana Daniels [assumed spelling] after this meeting about transportation. You are asked to submit your questions and writing to the chair. And we will have a two-minute break at this point in order that you may prepare your questions. If you have question which you wish to direct to Commissioner Baumgartner, will you please place those in the hands of the person collecting your questions first because the commissioner has a very pressing appointment and must leave us as soon as possible. And we would like to have and she has agreed to answer questions that are put to her.

[ Pause ]

Ms. Baumgartner, your first message is not a question but I think it should be read. Congratulations Dr. Baumgartner on a job well done. We women doctors of New York are justly proud of you.

[ Laughter ]

That is a free part as they say from the women doctors. Here's a question directed to Commissioner Baumgartner. In regard to your remarks regarding health examinations, has the chest x-ray survey been helpful in revealing other conditions besides TB? Are heart disease cases being revealed? For example, on many cases of dextrocardia with complete transposition of appendix and gallbladder on left side have been found for 100,000 examinations, it should be about 10 or more according to the Army records of World War II.

>>There is no question that mass x-rays that are initiated largely for the purpose of finding the unknown case of tuberculosis are extremely important in locating and detecting other conditions not only various heart conditions such as the questioner asks, but cancer of the lung are being determined. In the current expanded drive in New York City, for example, of chest x-rays to locate unknown cases of tuberculosis we are putting particular emphasis on some pretty careful evaluation studies to see how valuable this kind of examination is. The x-rays, in other words, are currently being read as they have been for some time not only for pathology associated with the tubercle bacillus but other pathology. The answer is yes.

>> Thank you. I think the panel will allow you to run along--

>> Well, I [inaudible] this as I--

>> And thank you very much.

>> --Dr. Kruse, we have two members of the Board of Health that are professors, this is a mistake because this semester one of them has their classes on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday and the other on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. So, 12 o'clock noon is the time we can get them on Wednesday [inaudible] of the time.

>> Thank you very much Commissioner Baumgartner. And then now a question directed to Commissioner McCarthy.

[ Noise ]

Do you make use of volunteer workers? How about arranging a tour to a day center?

>> We not only make use of but badly in need of additional volunteer workers in all of our day centers. And that we have some very fine volunteers who come in as often as they can during the week and who act as instructors in specialties which they know most about. We do invite volunteers and the way to become a volunteer or to suggest to anyone who wants to become a volunteer is to get in touch with our old aged--our Division of Day Care for the Aged in our central office at 250 Church Street. That would also--It would also be possible to see any one of the centers. I think if you see one you see all. There are some slight differences from one center to another but we'd be glad to arrange a visit and I'll say for anyone in this room who wants to visit one of our centers that we have some staff members from our 109th Street Center right here. Mr. Nelson probably will be ready to arrange that with you. Stand up and identify yourself in case anybody does want to visit 109th, which is just about four blocks walk from here.

[ Inaudible Remark ]

>> We invite you [inaudible] to the list of centers which you will see later in the program with the addresses. You may visit 9 to 5.

>> Mr. Nelson reminds me that the program includes a list of centers, all of which are opened from 9 to 5 and that all members attending this institute or the Academy of Fortnight are invited to come at any time and--

[ Inaudible Remark ]

--well any time--

[ Inaudible Remark ]

--any time between 9 and 5. Any day of this week, I would think. If you have a free morning, just go to one of the centers that's listed on the program and you will be welcomed. And Mr. Nelson, I assumed that all of our directors of all of our centers have been alerted to this invitation.

[ Inaudible Remark ]

You'd--You'll take them. Fine. Now, we have an easy question for Dr. Kolbe. Why is the incidence of senile psychosis so prevalent today? Also cerebral arteriosclerosis. Can you account for the increase of these conditions today?

>> I'm afraid I can't account for them. We know it to be a fact. We do know that cerebral arteriosclerosis does occur as part of the aging problem or process rather and as our population becomes a more aged population we will have more and more of these cases. I have no doubt at all, that socioeconomic factors also play a part in the development of certain symptoms which lead to the diagnosis of senility with concomitant psychosis.

>> The next question is directed to Commissioner McCarthy. Are there any figures on the percentage of war veterans coming under the care of departments who are entitled to care by the Veterans Administration? How far does the Veterans Administration go in accepting responsibility for such veterans?

>>Well, now as far as the financial support of veterans, we in our department have set up a separate office through which we handle all applications for public assistance from veterans and their families. This is called our Veterans Assistance Office and it's located down at Ninth Avenue, 40th Street. In that--one of the reasons we specialize in that office is that we have a staff that is specially trained to be aware of the various kinds of benefits that are available to the veterans either through federal legislation or state legislation. And sometimes we find that the veteran is entitled to a benefit which he himself is not aware of but which we can get for him which we have may either preclude the necessity of this getting assistance from us or make it possible for us to give him only supplementary assistance and thus cut down the mount of expenditure of the city and state money. As far as the medical service is available to veterans is concerned, it is our usual practice to see to it that a veteran in need of medical care who is entitled to it from the federal government gets that first. In other words, that's--the first point of call for a veteran and the first idea that occurs to our people when we are confronted with a veteran who needs any kind of medical health is--shall he get medical health from the Veterans Administration through its medical care program for service-connected or other disabilities. And certainly, in the case of hospitalization, our first protocol is the veterans hospitals. Our experience with respect to the veterans hospitals is slightly different than with the city hospitals. And that is so far, in our experience the veterans hospitals always have more vacant beds available than the city hospitals, which is a good thing from our standpoint because we have no difficulty in getting them in. Once in a while I have a personal case comes to the attention of the Commissioner's office where it does become necessary for me to persuade the Veterans Administration that this patient should be admitted to a veterans hospital but in the normal course, the Veterans Administration is prepared to take care of all veterans.

>> Thank you Commissioner McCarthy. We have time for just three more questions and the next question is directed to Dr. Kolbe. Is home care available to aged patients who have been treated in private hospitals? If so, at what cost? And what does home care consist of?

>> Home care service is not available to patients treated in voluntary hospitals except where the voluntary hospitals establish their own home care programs. You undoubtedly are familiar with the tremendous job that Montefiore Hospital has done in this particular field. We certainly hope that voluntary hospitals will establish home care programs. I think their value has been definitely established. It would be a service that would be invaluable to the patient as well as to the community. As I mentioned previously, we do have a very large home care program in the Department of Hospitals with a roster of approximately 2,000 patients at all times. And now, as to what does home care service include? It includes medical service, nursing service, housekeeping service, where necessary, as well as all the services that are available in the hospital itself. Medical service is given by the visits paid to these patients by members of our house care and visiting staff in the hospital to which their home care program is attached. Nursing service is obtained through the Visiting Nurse Association. The expense of which is defrayed by the Department of Hospitals. Housekeeping service is given where we realize that the patient cannot possibly be discharged to his own home unless some assistance is given to him in the nature of housekeeping services very much similar to the home making service of the Department of Welfare. Patients on home care are frequently brought back to the hospital, either to the outpatient department or to the inpatient service for special treatment, special observations when indicated. We carry the home care patient on our regular census, but is not considered transferred. When a patient has been on the inpatient service and is ready to go on to the home care service he is still carried on the census of the hospital as a transfer. In this manner, we try to give a comprehensive hospital service through the patient who requires medical, nursing services, but does not require actual hospitalization with the utilization of a bed, which is so urgently needed for acute cases and for other patients who are ill who need definitive treatment.

>> Thank you Dr. Kolbe. And, now Commissioner McCarthy, your final question. Have any steps been taken to introduce the concepts which you discussed into a hospital setting, particularly the concepts concerning mental health?

>> Before I answer that I wonder if Dr. Kolbe would permit me to supplement the answer to the last question. I just like to point out that the voluntary homes for the aged, many of them have now started their own home care program. This is something of a defensive operation because they realize that their waiting lists can be made a little less pressing if they carry on a home care program, thus keeping people who are on their waiting lists in the community longer by providing home care for them. Also as far as persons who are not dischargees from the--or transferees from the hospital service, we provide a visiting nurse service also and we pay for the visiting nurse service to the Visiting Nurse Association. Now, as far as an introduction of some of these concepts in the homes for the aged--homes and hospitals for the aged because most of them are developing into old homes and hospitals and many of them are now qualified as hospitals as well as homes for the aged. You find an increasing attention to this problem of the senile aging and a desire on their part also to forestall the rapid commitment of the older person, senile persons to mental hospitals. And in good many of these homes for the aged and I am thinking right now of both Catholic and Jewish, and I'm not aware of this being done in any of the Protestant homes, but it may be. But I do know of Catholic and Jewish homes for the aged where they have set aside a floor in the home for the aged which is a specialized floor for those who are becoming senile. But one interesting thing about the patients who are transferred to that floor as long--and kept there as long as they can without commitment to a mental hospital is that they're--is they'll be allowed to transfer back. The senile aged don't stay senile. In many cases, they have seemed to have cycles.

[ Pause ]

And there had been some of the senile aged transferred to this specialize floor who would show some improvement and are able to be brought back into the normal population of the home for the aged. It happens that Commissioner Baumgartner and myself are both ex officio members of the Mental Health Board to which Dr. Kolbe referred, and which has the very great responsibility of expansion of mental health facilities in the City of New York under the new state law which permits the state government to give the City of New York up to a maximum of $1 per person per year, which would give us roughly $8 million a year. And we have the responsibility on that board of deciding what facilities within the City of New York, both public and private, should be and can be expanded to provide more and more mental health services. Now, at the present time, since we've only been in operation since last October and only really started to spend the money since July 1st last, at the present time, we are pretty much giving priority to expansion of those mental health services which are dealing with youth and with potentially productive adults or rehabilitable adults. We have not yet got into the inclusion of any of the mental health services for the aged in any of our expansion programs. But certainly, I think the time will come when we will get to the possibility of providing additional funds, combined state and city funds, under the State Mental Health Act, for the expansion of these facilities in the homes for the aged and in hospitals which will be providing special mental health services for the aged.

>> Thank you, commissioner. And now the last question for Dr. Kolbe. Why are you closing Willard Parker Hospital if there is so much need for more beds for the aged? This large hospital is now well equipped with nurses and doctors and x-ray equipment.

[ Inaudible Remark ]

Willard Parker.

>> Willard Parker Hospital now operates as a hospital for contagious diseases and for, particularly, pediatric tuberculosis. You are well aware of the picture in tuberculosis and the falling hospital census for the tuberculous. We have closed other institutions for this reason. The state also has also been compelled to close tuberculosis institutions. As far as contagious disease is concerned, we are setting up other facilities to take care of this type of case. We will have a contagious disease unit at Bellevue Hospital, at Metropolitan Hospital, and at the Abraham Jacobi Hospital. From our study of the incident of contagious disease we know that we will have adequate facilities to take care of this type of case. Now with regard to the use of Willard Parker for aged patients, we must recognize the fact that Willard Parker is an old, obsolescent structure for the most part. We feel that the aged patient is entitled to facilities equal to those enjoyed by patients of other age groups and other conditions. We also have this situation due to the very great expansion program in the Department of Hospitals. We are establishing a sufficient number of beds, particularly in large hospitals to take care, for the time being, of the aged population of which he have been speaking on this time. We find by a study of the number of beds available or beds that will be available within the next year and also based on past experience at the Bronx, Queens, and Brooklyn will certainly have an adequate number of beds in general care hospitals and new institutions. We feel that many of the aged people can be taken care of in these facilities, particularly those who require hospitalization, which is our major problem at the present time. It is for these reasons that the Department of Hospitals has felt that there is no longer any need for Willard Parker Hospital.

>> Thank you Dr. Kolbe. I know that you would want me to express to the panel members, Commissioner Baumgartner, Commissioner McCarthy and Dr. Kolbe, our very deep thanks and warm appreciation for a most informative panel on the social welfare, public health and hospital aspects of the aged. The meeting now stands adjourned.

[ Applause ]



