>> Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. In cooperation with the New York Academy of Medicine, we bring you another of the season's lectures to the laity. The lectures presented by the Academy are open to the public free of charge and are held at the Auditorium of the Academy in New York City from which we are now broadcasting. The lectures are intended to bring to the layman knowledge and understanding of the new developments in medicine and insight into the processes involved in that development. The lectures are the scientists whose labors in the many fields sum up to the progress in medicine. Their talks, though given in the layman's language, do not sacrifice the precision or the reality of the experiences which add up to this knowledge obtained. This season's theme is the reciprocal relations between medicine and the other disciplines. Our speaker tonight is A. Hyatt Mayor, curator of prints at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, giving the George R. Siedenburg Memorial Lecture, the last of the season. And now to open the program here is the chairman of these laity lectures, Dr. Harold Brown Keyes.

>> Dr. Harold Brown Keyes: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Again, we welcome you here to what we are sure will be both an instructive and an interesting lecture. I call your attention to the fact that this is a George R. Siedenburg Memorial Lecture. He's one of the few people who are not doctors for whom a lecture is named in this Academy. Please note that the subject of this meeting is medicine and art. There are many doctors who think there is the practice of medicine and the art of medicine. I wish to digress and tell a story, which is always a dangerous thing to do, to try and illustrate my point between the practice of medicine and the art of medicine. Telephone rang in a local hospital, and the nurse answered the telephone, and the voice said how is Mrs. Murphy. She said Mrs. Murphy is doing alright. Well, is Mrs. Murphy going home Sunday? I think Mrs. Murphy's going home Sunday. Who is this? No answer. Are Mrs. Murphy's sutures out yet? She wasn't sure. She said wait a minute. Here's a nurse that may be able to tell you the things you want to know. The second nurse came on, and the same conversation went on. How is Mrs. Murphy? Well, she's doing very well. Who is this? No answer. Is she going home Sunday? Well, I think she's going home Sunday. Who are you? Who is this? No answer. Are her sutures out? Yes, I think her sutures are out, but who is this. Why, she said, this is Mrs. Murphy. The doctors tell you nothing. Now, it is my pleasure to introduce the chairman of the evening, who himself is an artist. Dr. Jerome Webster. Dr. Webster is a man of so many and varied competencies that to list them would embarrass the man and encumber the program. Perhaps it will suffice to say that he is an artist in human flesh, that he is an outstanding plastic and reconstructive surgeon. He is the author of the definitive biographical study of Gaspero Tagliacozzi, the great Italian pioneer in reconstructive surgery. Dr. Webster is in many ways a patron of the humanities and the arts. It gives me great pleasure to introduce Dr. Webster.

[ Applause ]

>> Dr. Jerome Webster: Ladies and gentlemen, it's a pleasure to be here tonight at this last meeting of the lectures for the laity, and we have a subject which I think is most interesting and which could be delved into many phases and would take a lifetime to cover really. So that the speaker this evening really has a problem. He had a paternal grandfather who was a helper of Thomas Edison, was very much interested in sound and worked on the graphophone and on the telegraph. Had one of the first telephones in his home in which he would have a son telephone to his guests down in the [inaudible]. So that when we're on the air tonight, this speaker's grandfather was one of the pioneers in that way. He was, he had his son, that is his father, was a helper and worker with the great Alexander Agassiz. And on the other side of his family, Alpheus Hyatt, his mother's father, was also contemporary of Agassiz's, and was a distinguished biologist. Mr. A. Hyatt Mayor graduated from Princeton and then went to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar and spent three years there and on the continent studying. On his return, he taught the history of art at Vasser and after a year became associate editor of "Hound and Horn". During the course of which time he came down to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in order to get material and there found the then curator of prints, Mr. William Ivans. Mr. Ivans was so much impressed with him that he induced Mr. Mayor to come to the Museum as an associate curator in 1932, and while he was associate curator, for a period time from '41 to '46 he was acting librarian of the museum. He became the director of prints at the Metropolitan Museum in 1946. He has written several books. "Life in America 1939", "Giovanni Battista Piranesi", one volume, and the [inaudible] family. He has also written an introduction to the work by Janus Schultz, "Baroque and Romantic Stage Design" and many other articles, particularly in the Bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum of Art he has contributed. He has been very helpful to me in certain instances, and I've marveled at his knowledge of the library which he has collected and which some of them are so rare that there are only two known copies that he showed, one in Rome and one at the Metropolitan. I'm sure that you will all thoroughly enjoy what Mr. A. Hyatt Mayor has to give you on the subject "Madison and Art".

[ Applause ]

>> A. Hyatt Mayor: The Academy of Medicine asked me to speak on medicine and art this evening because I organized a while ago an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum on anatomy and art, which is now on show. The exhibition centers around two main questions. That is to say what have artists done to record dissections and what, in turn, have dissections done to show artists how to portray man's body. Both of these questions lead to the innermost scrutiny of man, and both are closely related today when artists and doctors take an equal interest in how our bodies work. This was not always true. Medicine and art were not always connection. The earliest recorded dissectors were the Babylonian soothsayers who read the will of the gods by inspecting sheep's viscera. They chose to open the belly of the sheep rather than say the leg because the bones and muscles of the leg hardly vary from one individual to another individual whereas the intestines of a sheep are free to coil and fluctuate. The Babylonians connected dissection and prophecy so closely that they had almost the same word for flesh and for omen. They foresaw that a usurper would rule the land, which is, of course, very important to the present kings at the time of the prophecy. If a sheep's entrails resembled the face of a demon called humbaba [phonetic] who lived among steep climbs and barred paths in the vast forests, like the Minotaur in his labyrinth. The real humbaba may have been a volcano for all one knows because the Babylonian epic of [inaudible] says that his cry is like a hurricane, his mouth is fire, his breath death. The Babylonian priests had clay models of this terrible face of humbaba, which is probably the original of the [inaudible], in order to check against the entrails if they opened the course of business. This was a very strange clay face composed of coils of sausages. It looks like a fantastic kind of garden ornament, but actually was as serviceable as a foot rule for the Babylonian priests. The Babylonians considered that the fortress of the bowels, as they called it, enclosed the liver as a city [inaudible] close its temple. The liver is the biggest organ surrounding huge blood vessels look like the source of all life to them. It's thought and it felt according to their theory. It invigorated the entire body so that a passionate Babylonian could quite properly have said I love you with all my liver. The Babylonians didn't use their knowledge of sheep's anatomy to gain any idea of anatomy in general because they labored under a misconception that side tracked medicine until the Renaissance, that is for several thousand years. This was the unhelpful belief that our body is the little counterpart of the great world of the stars. Now a patient thinks that he has broken his leg or got pneumonia because certain stars are in a certain conjunction. He naturally pins his faith on astrologers and not on anatomists. Since error never dies, many people continue to this day to see themselves as puppets of the planets. The Greeks didn't pay too much attention to this fatalistic Babylonian astrology because they were tapping new powers in themselves. This kept them far too busy to think about such loony things. Therefore, Plato didn't compare man to the far away stars but to the immediate Earth. He likened man's hair to the forests, his veins to streams, and his bones to rocks. This poetic fantasy reinforced the error of the Babylonian astrologers to divert doctors from studying anatomy right up until the Middle Ages. The Greeks naturally opened sacrificial cattle in the routine practical business of prophecy, which they took over from their Babylonians, but Aristotle took a great step forward into pure theory when he dissected farm animals and monkeys in order to guess at man's insides by analogy. Religious ore forbade his dissecting human beings, but when pupils of his pupils two generations later came to Alexandria and saw Egyptian embalmers hacking away with unconcern, they took courage enough to begin dissecting men for science, which is the first time that was ever done in a medical school. Once started, they had to do, father, then redo for they not only dissected cadavers but also live criminals who had been condemned to death. They justified their cruelty in writings, which are now all lost, but which guided surgeons by describing how organs looked while still functioning. And it may be that a live man strapped to a table frightened a Greek less than the unconfinable ghost of a dead one. At least it was something concrete. The fear of tampering with the dead has increased today as we can see by the number of people who believe that Tutankhamen cursed the Egyptologists who first broke into his tomb. In about 2075 to 2025 B.C., roughly one can't be too sure about these dates, the great Alexandrian anatomists investigated with a freedom that was to be lost for over 1,500 years or until the Italian Renaissance. We today see how quickly liberty of thought can be killed. We must not forget how long it can lie dead. Already in Roman times, human dissection had become much riskier. It was also considered superfluous because monkeys were thought to be expendable replicas of man. By about 200 A.D., the physician Galan, whose writings have survived in greater bulk than those of any other ancient Greek author, described human anatomy at vast length without apparently ever having dissected a human being. A picturesque passage in his writings shows how hard it had become to study anatomy under the Roman Empire. This is what Galan wrote about 200 A.D.

[ Background Sounds ]

"In Alexandria, the doctors demonstrate actual human bones before your eyes. So I advise you to take advantage of this by going there. But if you can't go, then study man's bones as I have done in graves and broken tombs. Once when a river washed out a shallow grave dug a few months before, the floods swept the corpse six hundred feet downstream and deposited it on a steep cove where I found it face down with the flesh all rotted away and the bones hanging together by the gristle as though an anatomist had prepared it for teaching students. Another time, on a hillside by a road, I saw a highway man who had attacked a traveler and been killed. The local peasantry were happy to let the vultures strip the flesh off his bones in two days, leaving him like a dry classroom specimen." Isn't that curious? Of course, this was a terrible fate for a Greek to inflict upon any criminal because burial was an extremely important thing among the Greeks. But it's interesting to see how Greek science persisted in a mitigated form for four hundred years in Alexandria to provide a last refuge for free inquiry under the Roman Empire. The Romans discovered nothing in medicine. Plato says in his natural history, "Medicine, lucrative as it is, is the only Greek art that our Roman [inaudible] have so far refused to cultivate. Few of our fellow citizens have even attempted it, and those who have had at once deserted to the Greeks. If a doctor prescribes in any language but Greek, he loses all credit, even with the most ignorant." Greek, then, had the mystifying authority that Latin still has medical prescriptions. Clearly, then, the antique sculptor had only brief period during which he might have studied human anatomy from dissections. Direct study of the muscles and maybe even of the bones was impossible for the man who had made what we now consider to be the finest Greek sculptures. That is, from the anonymous beginnings through the work of [inaudible] up until about say 300 B.C. roughly. The dissection of human beings had again become practically impossible under the Romans. There remains the interval when Alexandria thought and created for the Mediterranean. The first scientific human dissections in Alexandria seem to have made such a stir that they must have attracted the attention of the painters and the sculptors who specialize in the nude in action. We can't be sure because we know so curiously little about all of this brilliant period, but anyone can see that sculptors of the age produced remarkably detailed and exact studies of muscles. Before the Alexandrian anatomists had begun to dissect, Greek sculptors did not particularize as many muscles as they did afterwards, but they had already carved nudes in action that still serve as models for Western art. With such a sketchy knowledge of human insides, how did these earlier Greeks learn to model nudes with such a lifelike structure in action? In a swift century development, their statutes step forth from their first tree trunk stiffness in order to walk, to run, to box, and then to relax into every casual attitude while the bones and muscles developed all their complex interplay. Even the Greek vase painters, however sloppy and incorrect, managed to make their nudes move with a freedom of action that only the greatest of later draftsman could rival. Now where did the Greeks get their knowledge for such feats? The answer that's usually given must be the right one, namely, the Greek artists developed their command of action by watching the games and exercises in the gymnasium. As the Greek artists study groups of naked bodies running, boxing, or wrestling, his eye must have assembled a composite image from all of them, an image, that is to say, not of John's arm or of Henry's arm delivering a punch, but of the arm punching. This may explain the generalized character [inaudible] and its much discussed ideal beauty and its inability to create a portrait as we understand portraits. When a revivalist who went back to a past style like Canova carved an idea nude in the Greek manner, his work is dead because he reaches his generalization through a memory of marbles in museums and not through a multiple image of jumping, lunging, exercising athletes. Canova constructed nudes as one writes a dead language. It was exactly like the Latin of the Renaissance by rules of grammar and syntax. While the Greeks worked with a current familiarity that sometimes eased into slang as it does it in the Greek vase paintings. Since ancient times, an artist has probably never had ample and frequent opportunities to watch naked crowds in action under full sunlight until our modern cult of the bathing beach. Modern artists profit so little by this opportunity because painting and sculpture have for the moment become decorative arts and, therefore, more or less dehumanized. The early Greek artists who could freely watch naked men exercising every day in a sharp outdoor light actually gained by being unable to strip the skin from a cadaver to study the full equipment muscles. The living athlete did not confuse him by revealing all the muscles at once, but only showed a few at a time as they bulged one after another to accomplish a series of actions. When a Greek artist watched an athlete's arm lift a weight, he saw only those muscles that lift, and did not see the other muscles that only flex for other actions. Thus, Greek artists learned to draw and model action with a clarity that's never been equaled. When copyists reproduce Greek statutes for Roman collectors, they simplified the anatomy still more boldly and made an even closer copy book for posterity. Because in copying one always leaves out a certain number of details. The anatomy of Greek sculpture is classic in the sense that it is inescapable. Western artists may rebel against it from time to time as [inaudible] as the Romans themselves rebelled against their Greek tutors, but we can never clear the Greeks permanently from our eye. The Greeks repeatedly dominate our art because they were the first to draw and to carve man's body in all the variety of its action in the same way they dominate our literature and our psychology because they were the first to explore man's emotions and a good part of their range and depth. And a few, a little while ago, Dr. Goldstone lectured in this hall about the Oedipus complex, which is a basic structure of psychology that is also taken from the Greeks. When Greek art went underground during the Middle Ages, Greek science survived among the Arabs. From about 850 to 950 A.D., the [inaudible] of Baghdad had careful translations made of many Greek books on mathematics, botany, biology, medicine, and every aspect of Greek science. The Greeks, the Arabs didn't consider the Greeks as sculptors or painters or poets as we do but as inventors, engineers, and doctors. The Arab [inaudible] wrote that the ancient Greeks taught others how to make things but did not themselves make them, which is a very strange opinion to us. The Arabs who adapted the anatomy of Aristotle and Galen became better doctors than the medieval Europeans who forgot it. The Arabs added nothing to Greek anatomy because they dreaded dissecting human beings even more than the Greeks. The Koranic tradition, that is not the Koran itself, but the sayings and the traditions grown up around it, forbids a Muslim from cutting into a dead man even though, it says, even though he may have swallowed a priceless pearl. Arab medical students were finally allowed to dissect Jews and Christians in 1838, but to this days, Muslims can sometimes riot at the mere rumor of a legal autopsy to determine the suspected murder. When the Arabs began to translate from the Greek, they were so eager to dissect that they transported a big ape from Nubia all the way to the Euphrates because Galen had written that his anatomy was just like a man's. Nowadays, we do, we don't have to get a Greek anatomical writings through Arabic translations because we've recovered many of the original texts, but none of the surviving Greek manuscripts have preserved the anatomical charts or diagrams for teaching that Aristotle mentions. These diagrams have probability survived without change through centuries of copying in the curious anatomical figures that illustrated Arabic medical manuscripts from the earliest of them until after 1800. These were jumping jack figures which were drawn in sets of five in order to demonstrate the bones, muscles, veins, arteries, and moves. The Arabs didn't try to draw the shape of any muscle or vein, and one would think that any, a Greek must have drawn, they've had drawing so much in their blood, but the Arabs merely wrote the name of each vein or muscle in the proper place inside the outline of the figure. The Orient may have created its only original anatomical figures in the Chinese diagrams of the digestive tract. These curious fantasies and soft plumbing are drawn inside the outline of a human torso, but could perfectly well have been studied from some animal's entrails. [Inaudible], the Japanese woodcut artist, showed the Oriental ignorance of the internal anatomy in his drawing book where he offered painting students a page of fat people and another page of thin people in various attitudes for artists to copy and adapt in their pictures. The fat people float as confidently as the balloons in a Macy's parade, but the thin people collapse in a jumble like jack straws because he knew nothing about the structure of the skeletal. Western art can really become as exquisite as Oriental art because we are always being jolted by the raw revelations of bone and muscle. Since Orientals do not cut into a man's body or try to get inside the construction of things by a mathematical perspective, they are freer than we are to finish surfaces, to match colors, to devise brushstrokes, and invent patterns and compositions. Rare is the westerner like Simone Martini who can rival the Oriental's flat pattern as he does in that wonderful enunciation in Siena. Anatomy and perspective present the West with problems so tough and so inexhaustible that Western art could never catch up with them. By ignoring these problems, Oriental art has gained consistently, although it's lost contact with man. Now that anatomical studies and mathematical perspective has spread all over the world, one wonders how they will affect Oriental art. Will they destroy the Orientals' mastery of flat pattern? They probably will because it will seem as though even though the Oriental rug weavers were losing their sense of flat design that they always have had. From about 1250 until 1325, more or less, many Arabic medical books were translated into Latin. These Latin translations introduce many more errors in the first Arab translations from the Greek because the Arabs were much more learned in their translating than the Latins were. The Latin translations not only deformed the sense of the originals, they also apparently omitted the Arabic anatomical diagrams which have perhaps been derived from the Greek. It looked as though Europe would discover no more anatomy than the Arabs, and would do a good deal less than they did to preserve the discoveries of the Greeks. The medieval and Christian narrowed this intellect more than the Arab by submitting to a much more rigid theology. Arab medieval literature is [inaudible] on all kinds of subjects that were forbidden to think about in the West. A Christian found it hard to imagine how he could assemble himself for the Last Judgment if he had been anatomized. As John Dunn said in one of his many opinions that echo the Middle Ages, how should this leg lost in [inaudible] join that arm that has lost in the sands of Arabia. The last [inaudible], so on. But Italy had ideas that were to allow men to dissect other men more freely than ever before. The Italians held to the antique Roman tradition that man must not project anything human, and in the Renaissance, they set out to do everything that they had read about in Greek and Latin literature, including the records of dissection, which they read in Galen and other authors. Modern dissection began in the free thinking poly glot [phonetic] south of Italy in about 1230 when the Emperor Frederick II forbade any doctor to practice unless he had dissected human bodies for at least a year. That's the terms of the decree. In the later 1200's, Italian doctors were ordering autopsies of suspected murder, and Italian doctors were dissecting to verify the new translations from the Arabic. By 1316, dissection had become so usual that an Italian doctor called [inaudible] wrote the first classroom manual. He begins by saying, "Lay the hanged of a headed body on a trestle," and then itemizes the whole of man in the order of his decay. First, the entrails, brains, muscles, bones. Being a practical teacher, [inaudible] drew up a finding list of the body and wasted no time on descriptions.

[ Background Sounds ]

His simple inventory guided even on Leonardo da Vinci and remained in use long after [inaudible] publishes "Great Anatomy" in 1543. That is over, for over 200 years. There is Venetian editions of [inaudible] in the 1490's show a woodcut of a professor reading a book from a high pulpit while [inaudible] below takes the cleaver to a cadaver. The spectators on both sides of the woodcut obviously do not want to explore, but they want to memorize a standard text just like any medical students today. The medial knows that if you should find something that's not mentioned in the book, he best slip it quietly into the slot bales as not to ruffle the authority of the schools by intruding [inaudible] of fact. The [inaudible] was later to ridicule the sterile disassociation of the professor reading from the menial dissecting. And the fact is that in the Middle Ages the physician had a high standing because his patients often survived the medicines that he prescribed from his reading of books. While the barber surgeon was a mere menial because his patients usually died of blood poisoning after his method chopping [phonetic]. The doctor in the Venetian woodcut of Modina looks like a preacher in the pulpit or a judge on the bench because he's actually a little of both. You can see him in the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum sitting in his bench. As the spectator's watched the criminal's body disintegrate, they see punishment continuing beyond the gallows to a preview of the last judgment. The Christian drama of anatomy attracted such a public that by 1500 there was at least the plan of building temporary anatomical theaters, which were probably improvised in courtyards, and very soon universities built theaters. [Inaudible] in 1540, [inaudible] in 1556, and so on throughout Europe except in Eastern Europe and perhaps in England. These anatomical theaters were like theaters in every sense. Handbills advertised performances which began on the day following the hanging or beheading of a criminal from out of town since natives were never dissected. Carnival was the usual time for these shows when the weather was still conveniently cold and the opera and the theater season produced a crowd of masqueraders and the women of the town who would drop in for a look between other entertainments. The city council at Lydon proposed the playing of flutes to draw larger audiences because they had a, took a slight cut in the gate. Even in the day time, the dissections often took place by candlelight. In the theater in Padua, which still exists, eight candles burned in two chandeliers while another eight moved where needed in the hands of students. Nowadays, color movies have taken the place of anatomical theaters because they show more details to larger audiences. In 1502, a Venetian, Alexander Benedetti, published specifications for temporary theater that were followed in constructing the first permanent theater in Padua and then became standard in many places. Benedetti says, "A temporary theater for anatomy should be built in a large and well aired place with seats in circles as in the Coliseum in Rome or the Arena at Verona," and that shows again the whole connection between antique Roman literature and the practice of dissection. Then Benedetti says, "The theater must be big enough to accommodate many spectators without crowding the teacher. There should be two ushers to expel intruders and two honest doormen to collect entrance fees to pay for the instruments. Lay the cadaver on a high table in the middle where the teacher can reach it readily." These public performances, which were especially accessible in Italy, made it easy for artists to watch dissections if they wanted to. Drato [phonetic] could have studied anatomy in Padua when he was painting the Arena Chapel there, and when it was already the greatest medical school of Europe, but if he did watch dissections, his paintings show no results. The fact is that he didn't need an accurate idea of the kneecap or the biceps in order to paint figures in robes and cloaks, nor did his followers for over a century. Then in the early 1400's, the new taste for Greek and Latin literature called for illustrations for Ovid or Virgil and [inaudible] and all of the authors that were being revived. There words had survived from the ancient copies of manuscripts, but their ancient illustrations, if there were any, had almost entirely perished. The new illustrations obviously called for nudes as anyone could see from the antique sculptures and vases that turned up in plowing and digging everywhere. So for the first time in over a thousand years, artists had to draw nudes in graceful action which was proper to gods and to heroes. This must be why artists took no advantage of public dissections during their first hundred years, which is a very curious thing to think of. The first artist who was definitely have known to have dissected is Antonio Pollaiuolo in Florence. Vasari, his first biographer, said that Pollaiuolo understood the nude in a more modern way than the masters before him. He skinned many human bodies to study the anatomy and was the first to, thus, investigated the action of the muscles in order to draw them correctly. Antonio engraved on copper a combat of nude male figures. This engraving, which is known as "The Battle of the Ten Naked Men", may have been made as early as the 1460's and is the largest and most elaborate engraving made up to that time. It opened a new [inaudible] as the first of hundreds of Italian prints that taught the rest of Europe how to draw the figure for over a hundred years and so established a way of seeing the figure that lasts to this very day. Pollaiuolo's "Battle of the Naked Men" crams a whole course of figure drawing into one picture by showing many varied actions and by crowding each body with all its muscles, regardless of which will be flexed and which not. The figures are less than naked. They're flayed for if they had skin, it would hide many of the muscles and the sinews that Pollaiuolo engraved. Leonardo da Vinci was probably thinking of this familiar print, or at least of Pollaiuolo's work in general, when he wrote that, "A good painter must select the muscles to produce any given action. And," said Leonardo, "he must emphasize the bulging of those muscles only and not of the rest as some painters do who think that they are showing off their draftsmanship when they draw nudes that are knotty and graceless." In other words, mere sacks of nuts says Leonardo. Like any new idea, the novelty drives to excess. Surface anatomy overcame art on its first impact. Pollaiuolo was discovering man as eagerly as the navigators who were then exploring unknown shores and seas. He tried to chart all of man's muscles at the very time when Italian cartographers were trying to map the dizzily expanding world. Both attempted to report the whole of their new discoveries. Vasari showed his usual insight when he called Pollaiuolo the first modern, that is, Renaissance painter. For he did, indeed, start Western art on his main course of drawing. His dissection revealed such a new world in man's body that only the most brilliant of his fellow Florentines followed his lead. Dissections for artists became a Florentine monopoly for 75 years or so. Accident has probably destroyed the many studies of dissections that Pollaiuolo must have drawn while learning to map the muscles in such detail, for not one seems to survive today. So the oldest surviving group of great anatomical drawings is by Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo must have begun dissecting like Pollaiuolo in order to investigate the bones and the surface muscles which he had to know in order to become an up-to-date naturalistic painter of nudes in action to be in the fashion of the Renaissance. He then grew fascinated with anatomy as an end in itself. He planned to make an anatomical book for artists by showing the development of the body from infancy to old age. Or in another project for a book, he planned to draw each part of the body from several points of view in order to situate it exactly in its relationships, more or less like a stereoscopic photograph today. This went beyond the needs of art for what painter ever has to draw the heart or the lungs. Such a methodical expositions for science also went beyond Leonardo's own capabilities for investigating hither and yon as his interests led him. So in spite of his observation, his originality, and his skill, he could not have founded anatomy as a modern science. It's not the Leonardo scorned the learning of the schools. On the contrary. Like many men who never went to college, he was, he had an undue respect for scholastic authority. He followed Mondino's textbook so humbly that he sometimes drew formations that exists nowhere except in Mondino's lists. Also accepting the old galenic [phonetic] theory that man and the animals have practically interchangeable organs, Leonardo would draw a bull's larynx in a man's throat or a human fetus in a cow's uterus. His shortcomings did not detract from the glory of his achievement. His anatomical drawings are not only the first accurate ones, their delicate swiftness has never been equaled to this very day. His practice as a designer of steam engines and of airplanes led him to see the body as a living machine, and to draw the engineering of the bones with a livelier action than any artist has ever achieved. When he analyzed the supernation [phonetic] of the forearm, he didn't draw or describe it as a dead dissection but as though the fluoroscope of his imagination saw the bones crossing and uncrossing as the hand reaches out for food and then twists back to put it into the mouth. That's the words by which he describes these wonderful drawings of the bones crossing and uncrossing. Dissection did not detain him among corpses but led him to probe the living body more deeper than any artist before him. While most of Leonardo's anatomical drawings lay unpublished for four centuries until 1897, they were studied by many Renaissance men and so must have helped to set a new standard of anatomical publication the culminated in the work of Vesalius. Leonardo lacked the academic system to do was Vesalius did, but he had a rarer gift than that. He could entangle a plan of a limp confusion of tissues and then could draw his discovery so unmistakably that his drawings could forever guide another dissector to see what he saw. He originated something much more basic than a systematic anatomy for he discovered how to describe nature through selective intellectual accurate pictures. Without such picture making, modern science could not exist, and the discipline of difficult, descriptive drawing gave his art an intellectual fascination that art has lost today by being divorced from science. Anatomy obsessed the Renaissance Florentines almost as much as Greek and Latin literature. After Leonardo, any enterprising Florentine artist had to acquire at least a passing knowledge of dissection. Some, like Michelangelo, followed him also by making drawings for books on artistic anatomy, which, like Leonardo's books, came to nothing. Michelangelo said that he felt unable to write his book on anatomy with sufficient style and dignity. And his diffidence shows how high he rated the study of man's body, but, nevertheless, it does sound strange from a writer whom we consider to be Italy's second poet. Michelangelo probably dissected less than Leonardo and certainly did not investigate much beyond the bones and the surface muscles. He proved his knowledge of these by sometimes drawing a skeleton and then a muscle man in the same pose in order to study a figure that he was planning to carve. Study of the figure underlay his entire art for as an old man he once wrote, "The members of architecture depend on the members of man. One must excel and always have excelled in drawing figures and especially dissections in order to understand architecture." Michelangelo had the curious fate of being better known outside Italy as a painter than as a sculptor because most of his paintings in the Sistine Chapel were engraved but few of his sculptures. Nowadays, of course, we think him most as sculptor because we have the plastic [inaudible] see him. The prolific designers of prints and consequently the most famous Italian artist during their own lifetime were Rafael and his school. Many of Rafael's drawings and designs for frescoes were engraved in Rome, and these prints did more to carry Rafael's fame beyond Italy. They swept across Europe like a fire of the mind, consumed the gothic sky, and replaced it with a higher Renaissance in a bare thirty years. Rafael was admirably equipped to teach a new way of drawing in the figure for, as Vasari says, he trained himself out of his master Perugino's old-fashioned way of drawing by studying dissection in order to understand the mechanism of the body. Learning a new style during his maturity smoothed some of the personality out of his art, but made him a model so clear and so simplified that anyone could learn from it. And then Rafael's continuous swift production forced him to construct figures quickly with guidelines and rules of thumb. And these schemes were so handy and so sensible that they're as good today as they were in 1520. Rafael perfected the delicate and thoughtful Italian art of painting figures from recollections of the model. Vasari mentions the common shop practice of Italian artists of drawing from the nudes in the summers when you could undress and not be too uncomfortable and painting from the studies in the winters when you couldn't heat a room properly. The winters' recollection best clarified essentials by forgetting details. Rafael brought this lucid kind of drawing to its fullest beauty. His line goes exploring and describes forms under a control as easy and inevitable as water flowing around a rock. None of these artists, brilliant though they were, could create the modern science of anatomy. To describe the body comprehensively in word and picture, an anatomist had to outline an overall scheme for an artist to illustrate in drawings. Neither specialist could do it alone for the anatomist couldn't draw well enough, and the artist had no scholastic system.

[ Background Sounds ]

Michelangelo must have realized his need for academic training when he confessed that he wrote Italian too badly to make a book, and asked an anatomist to help him, but who could have ever collaborated with such a haunted titan. When finally an anatomist and an artist [inaudible] working together, the team created anatomy as we know it today. This systematic demonstration of human anatomy by word and by picture was accomplished by two northerners, who were, as it were, catalyzed by coming to Italy. The anatomist and the artist who combined the words and pictures that made modern anatomy both were born in the low countries about 15 years apart and came at about the same time to Venice or to the university that Venice ran at Padua. We know a great deal about the anatomist, Andreas Vesalius, because he argued in print, but we know little about the artist illustrator, Jan Stephen of Calcar, because he left no letters and didn't so much even sign a picture. So posterity is naturally given all the credit to the anatomist and has forgotten the artist. Actually, neither could have got along without the other. When Vesalius started to study anatomy in [inaudible] at 14 and continued in Paris at 19, he found so little chance to dissect that he used to rob the gallows and the gibbets by the high road despite the darkness, the police, and the packs of wild dogs. His passion for anatomy inevitably led him to the greatest scientific university in the world, which is the Padua, where dissection were as much a routine as lectures. He studied so brilliantly the Padua gave him a degree in less than a year and then on the following day made him professor of anatomy. He was still only 22. In the Renaissance, a Fleming found it as easy to study in Italy as at home for the old Latin-speaking universities were much more cosmopolitan than any university today. Any university man at the Renaissance could converse in Latin equally easily in any university for the ancient Roman unity of Europe died last in the universities. Before Vesalius, anatomists had noted discrepancies between Galen's text and the findings of their dissections, but it explained the differences by assuming the copyists or translators had corrupted Galen's meaning. Vesalius' dissections convinced him that Galen had been wrong in assuming that man's organs must exactly resemble those of animals. As he said, Galen's monkeys betrayed him. Anatomy had to begin all over again from the human body only. He started this epoch making work by publishing an illustrated pamphlet on the blood vessels and the skeleton when he was 24. His full labors appeared in his great work, "De humani corporis fabrica", in 1543 when he was 29, and he lived on to be 50 without adding to his achievement. His illustrators, Jan Stephen of Calcar, was about 15 years older. When he came to Venice during his 30's, he mastered Titian style so completely that his paintings, if any survive, are more or less lost among the great mass of Titian's work. After drawing his anatomical illustrations for Vesalius, he went to Naples and soon afterwards died. In order to illustrate any given dissection, the anatomist must have discussed with the illustrator just what aspects to underline in order to make the picture play its part in an overall survey of the body. The artist must then have experimented to find exactly which angle and which lighting brings out what the anatomist wanted. And then, the real test of awareness, the artist had to consider the infinite ways of drawing even the simplest shape in order to choose just those lines that describe the important aspects of unmistakable distinctness. The resulting picture has to look real and yet be almost as selective as a diagram. In this difficult task of understanding and then of drawings is to convey the understanding to others Vesalius' illustrator attained almost the clarity of Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo's drawings are more swift, are more exquisite. They move with the subtle flexibility, but they are hardly plainer than the bold flow of Calcar's woodcuts. Calcar dramatized Vesalius' science so unforgettably that European art has never been the same since. Calcar focused wholly on the human forms and showed them looming in front of a blank sky. Each skeleton shows bones in a different action by holding a spade or by bowing its back and clasping its hands or by leaning on a monument to contemplate a skull with an intensity that might well have suggested Hamlet's meditation on Yorick. The muscle men are not flat and lean like real autopsies, but they expand their chests and they flex their biceps as though still, though they stood in the pride of life. Calcar linked his lofty muscle men together by drawing a continuous landscape up to their knees. These landscapes, drawing them into a frieze, there are eight who face you and six who turn their backs to you. In the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum, you'll see two friezes of these muscle men pasted together which were given to the museum by the Academy of Medicine. By pasting these woodcuts together, a doctor could decorate his lecture hall or study with a tattered ballet of muscle men who declaim and strut as long they keep their full equipment of muscles but who stagger and collapse after their outer muscles have been cut away. Calcar turned the medieval dance of death into a Renaissance dance of life. He couldn't have created a more dramatic demonstration of the will to life, the determination to do despite everything, which chiefly distinguishes Western man from the Orientals. The publication of Calcar's woodcuts ended one period and began another. Anatomy ceased to be Galenic and became permanently Vesalian. The pictures explain so much that they destroy the zest of discovery of the Florentine artists who had pioneered for over two generations. Even if Michelangelo could have pulled himself together to finish his anatomy book, he must have realized that the world needed his effort less after 1543 than before. Before 1543, an artist who wanted to know bone and muscle had no way except by dissecting. Calcar's woodcuts gave him a cheaper, handier, and less messy source of information. Thus, Calcar's illustrations did not stimulate dissection among artists but discouraged it. The great artist of the baroque didn't dissect nearly as much as the Florentine's of about 1460 to 1540. Even Rubens, although he's Michelangelo's heir in anatomical knowledge, probably learned more by copying anatomical drawings of Leonard, Michelangelo, and Calcar than by dissection. Of course, there have always been the passionate few who were determined to know more anatomy than they could learn from pictures. So there have always been and always will be exceptional artists like Jericho and Eakins in Philadelphia who could satisfy their longing to explore man's body only by undergoing the disagreeable chores of dissection. Calcar's anatomical illustrations have so much information that painters could makes themselves models for painting out of little wax dolls with accurate muscles and correct proportions. When these dolls were bent into altitudes of flying and dangled by threads in the sharp light of a candle, they helped the painter like Tintoretto to paint those plunging, soaring angels in poses that no living model can hold. Without Calcar's woodcuts, it's hard to imagine how baroque art could have achieved this conquest of the air. Nowadays, modern painting and sculpture would seem to gone far away from classical anatomy, but the inventors of modern art, such as Picasso and Matisse, were trained in academic figure drawing. A man who is able to draw a figure correctly has earned the right to put three eyes in a head if he chooses to. As figure drawing becomes less realistic and more emotional today, certain artists feel compelled to imagine the inside of a living body to that [inaudible] paints a portrait head and fluorescent sinuses and Dali shows a tibia in love with the liver. Those painters are like Leonardo da Vinci in their eagerness to strip the secrets of man, only unlike Leonardo, they are not trying to clarify something in nature. They investigate their own feelings about something in nature. For art today has been divorced from science. This separate specialization of art and science has left art without the intellectual stimulus of scientific discovery and science without the imagination to make you and me feel the reality of its revelations. If only art and science could again collaborate, think how Dali would make us watch the growth of a cancer cell, and how Picasso could demonstrate the fusion of the atom. The discipline of understanding these difficult processes would not sap a great artist's originality but would strengthen it with fresh resources. Some connection must be re-established between art and science and especially between art and anatomy if art is to appeal to the whole of man, his intellect as well as his emotions. And only a knowledge of anatomy can free the artist to dominate his model or to create from the depth of his imagination without a model some image whose eloquence everyone must understand. Thank you. If there are any questions, I'd be very glad to try to answer them.

[ Applause ]

>> Thank you very much, Mr. Mayor. We've enjoyed it tremendously, and I will be glad to have all those who have questions in the audience write them and have them collected and passed up. I would say that when Mr. Mayor spoke about the Greeks and the naked athletes forming a wonderful basis for their art, that brought right up to the present day Dr. Tate McKenzie, who died a few years ago, and was physician for the students at the University of Pennsylvania. Was a great sculptor of the human form. Two and a half years ago over there, I saw the Scottish-American memorial in Edinburgh below Princess Street, and another at the Greenwich Observatory, too, at Cambridge. Read out the question. Did Leonardo da Vinci paint any of his anatomical subjects in color?

>> He didn't paint them in color so far as anything has ever have survived, but he made drawings in black chalk and red chalk or red chalk and brown ink.

>> This question. If you wished to do work in the field, how would you go about finding and obtaining a position?

>> That's too practical a question for me. I'm only a theorist I'm afraid.

>> This question is are there any remarks on pathology in art -

>> One could talk for several hours about the pathology in art only I don't know enough, I'm sorry to say. The question would be extremely interesting to investigate and has been investigated in a number of German books on drawings by the insane and drawings by prisoners and that kind of thing. Extremely interesting books, but, unfortunately, I know nothing about the subject of pathology and art -

>> You might say that the little dwarves who were court jesters were painted -

>> Yes -

>> Besides the princes and kings, and they were [inaudible].

[ Background Sounds and Discussion ]

>> If, I think if Jan Stephen Calcar's works were unsigned and also lost among Titian's, how do you -

>> Know of his work? [Multiple speakers]

>> Oh, yes. In various ways. Calcar published the first little pamphlet which was brought out called "The Tabulus X", and it was published by him in Venice, and he is also mentioned in various documents. So that his connection with Vesalius is quite clear. Vesalius in one place speaks of my illustrators in the plural. There he may have meant not only Calcar who made the drawings, but also several men who could have cut those drawings on wood. At least one woodcutter helped Vesalius when he packed up the wood blocks in Venice to have them shipped up north and printed in Basil. The question is not altogether clear. Some of the anatomical figures are drawn by Vesalius and not by Calcar. The vein men were drawn, Vesalius says, by himself, and, of course, it's easier to draw a pattern of veins, a flat pattern of veins than it is a round structure of bones or of muscles.

>> We have this. Have the modern technological means displaced the modern artist in the scientific fields?

>> Well, I don't really know. The camera, of course, has done a great deal that the old engraver and woodcutter used to do, but the camera cannot see selectively enough so that there's always a great deal that has to be drawn by hand. If you see a great tangle of evidence, such as you would in a complicated machine or in a dissection, very often you want to bring out only certain aspects of that evidence in order to clear up some point. You want to bring out a picture of the nerves or the muscles or the bones when they're all tangled up together.

[ Background Sounds ]

Therefore, an artist can emphasize certain aspects of a thing, and much, where as a camera cannot. So there's always a place for an artist, at least in medicine, and in sciences in general. There should be a greater place.

>> [Inaudible] stands behind me and has 64 books of his drawings and also takes [inaudible] to give the color and so forth.

[ Background Sounds ]

In the 20th century, in this 20th century collaboration between the two professions, does the doctor call upon the artist more often than the artist needs the doctor, and if so.

>> There, I don't know. Not being a doctor, I don't know. Or an artist. Wish I could answer that, but I can't.

>> In art discussions, from your experience with mature artists, how does the experienced artist justify his work as a controlled expression of his emotions? Now I'll read that again. In art discussions, from your experience with mature artists, how does the experienced recognized, mature artist justify his work as a controlled expression of his emotions?

>> Well, of course, a good many artists loudly say that they've never grown up and never intend to. And that, for an artist like Chagall, is his whole platform. He paints like a child. He's determined to be as much a child as possible. That's also true Paul Clay, who rejoins a child's drawing with an adult's intellect. So that I don't think I know how to answer that, I'm sorry to say except I, as a sort of a pirouette and a sidestep, which I apologize for.

>> Alright. Here is one in which Mr. Mayor once helped me. If an x-ray of a painting discloses that a previous painting is on the canvas, does that necessarily condemn the painting -

>> No, it merely shows that the painter was hard up.

[ Laughter ]

>> Is it not true that the early success of Alexander Agassiz's work depended on his collaborating illustrators -

>> Well, that's a charming question because my father was one of his illustrators. And as a good son, I would certainly say that it depend on his illustrator. I wouldn't respect myself if I didn't.

>> Doesn't an artist get more confused by a welder of tissues than if he dissected out one or more muscles?

>> I think probably anybody would. It's a very, anatomy's a very confusing study, and until Leonardo, nobody made much pictorial sense out of it. Nobody's made more since, I must say. Yes. [multiple speakers]

>> I think that.

>> That's the lot, I think.

>> I'm afraid, I think we've covered all the questions, and we thank you very much indeed, Mr. -

[ Applause ]

>> Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to announce to you that on March 10th in Hosack Hall, that's this hall, at 8:30 P.M. there will be held a meeting to commemorate the birth of Paul Erlich. The audience is cordially invited to attend. The contributors to this meeting will be Dr. Temkin of Johns Hopkins University, Dr. Ernest Jockal of the Heart Research Institute, Fairview Village, Pennsylvania, and our own Dr. Cornelius P. Rhodes of Memorial Hospital. I wish to announce, too, as you know, this is the last of this current series of laity lectures, and we will be glad to welcome you again in the fall. The meeting is adjourned. Good night.

