>> From the auditorium of the New York Academy of Medicine, your city station brings you the final lecture in this season's series of Lectures to the Laity. These lectures are presented free of charge to the public and broadcast by your city station in an attempt to bring to the layman the latest news of progress in medicine as presented by the men concerning the work itself. Tonight we're to hear the George R. Seidenberg Memorial lectures on the evolution of nutrition. Now to introduce tonight's presiding Chairman, here is Dr. Harold B. Keyes, Chairman of the Committee of Laity Lectures. Dr. Keyes.

>> Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Again, on behalf of the Committee of Laity Lectures of the Academy of Medicine, we welcome you here for this last lecture for this season. This lecture is a memorial lecture for the memory of George R. Seidenberg. We're very fortunate tonight in our chairman, in our time of service, he is an old and beloved friend of the academy, Dr. Frank G. Boudreau, Executive Director of the Milbank Foundation. It gives me pleasure to introduce Dr. Boudreau.

[ Applause ]

>> Dr. Keyes, ladies and gentlemen, I liked almost everything that Dr. Keyes said about me except his emphasis on old. I hope you didn't notice it. Dr. Keyes told me that I could speak to you for just a moment about this lecture, which is the last of the Laity Lectures. The Committee on Laity Lectures is the committee which has prepared this feast for you. And when we come to the end of these lectures, I think a tribute should be paid not only to the committee and to the academy which places them at your disposal, but also to the other thing that's necessary for the success of any lecture, and that is the sympathetic and attentive and, of course, intelligent audience. I think the audience at these Laity Lectures have been something which have encouraged the Academy of Medicine and the Committee on Laity Lectures to pursue this work. Now we're at the end of the series, this is the last one until next year. And next year, of course, will be even better than this one has been, although this has reached a high point. And tonight, we have a lecture prepared by an old friend of mine, a very splendid physician, Dr. Russell N. Wilder. He is at present Director of the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases. And this, as you know, is one of our great national research institute's in Washington, at Bethesda. He was until recently a member of the Mayo Clinic. Professor of Medicine at the University of Minnesota. And before that, he was Professor of Medicine at the University of Chicago. But when the war was approaching in 1940, Dr. Wilder abandoned his work at the Mayo Clinic up in Rochester, Minnesota, and came to Washington to see what he could do to keep the people of our country in a good state of nutrition and health. He first of all served as Chairman of the Commission on Medicine, and then as Chairman of the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. And as some of you look back on the war years and remember how easy it was for you to get good food and to be well nourished, then you should pay a tribute to Dr. Russell N. Wilder, the author of the lecture tonight. After the outbreak of war, he became chief of a division of the government known as the Civilian Food Requirements Branch of the Food Administration. And there again, he kept the interests of the civilians in mind. Now, you're going to hear Dr. Wilder's lecture tonight, but you're not going to see him, because last week, on Friday, Dr. Wilder called me up, he was taken sick suddenly and he is now in the hospital, fortunately, getting along very well. But he was so anxious that the audience here should not be disappointed by his fate which has appeared, that he called me up and told me that he was sending his lecture here. We have his lecture and it's going to be presented to you by someone else, so that you will have the additional advantage of hearing a lecture from Dr. Wilder and hearing it from the lips of another distinguished figure in the field of nutrition. The speaker tonight is too a member of the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. He has to his credit many articles on nutrition and several books. He's Director of the Bureau of Nutrition in our own New York City Department of Health. He wanted me to make it clear to you that he was reading not his own lecture but the lecture of Dr. Russell N. Wilder. After the lecture, he will answer questions that you may wish to put to him in writing. Someone will circulate through the hall with a pen and a pad and you may send questions up to the platform. I think we are very fortunate tonight in having the excellent material prepared by Dr. Wilder and having it presented to us by a very distinguished figure in the field of nutrition, my friend, Dr. Norman Jolliffe.

[ Applause ]

>> Dr. Boudreau, Dr. Keyes, ladies and gentlemen, it is fortunate that man more effectively than any other form of life has been able to adapt to his environment, or rather through the exercise of his intelligence, man has learned how to modify his environment to meet his needs. Thus, by use of suitable clothing, shelter, and various mechanical contrivances, he so regulates the temperature of the air around him that he lives without too great discomfort, either in the Arctic or in the jungles of the Amazon. So also using oxygen, he can climb the highest mountains, or in airplanes, ascend to twice the elevation of the highest mountain without incurred effect. By the same exercise of his intelligence, he successfully protects himself against attack by other predatory animals, although less effectively against attack by other man, and from diseases, and from disease-provoking germs and viruses, although less successfully against the viruses. Even so, vaccination against the smallpox virus was one of the early triumphs of immunology. Man's control of his environment has been especially successful with respect to his supply of food and drink. Before the dawn of history, he had domesticated certain animals and birds, thereby he overcame the uncertainties of hunting to meet his food needs. He next developed agriculture, thus furthering ensuring himself against interruptions of his food supply. He increased his flocks and field more and more, until the day with current technical advantages, one man's labor is enough to feed 14 others at least here in our country. Requiring more, not only for his own consumption, but for his fields and gardens, he has assured his supply of water since very ancient times by building reservoirs and aqueducts. More recently, a great deal of attention has been paid to the sanitary quality of food and water. So currently as only yesterday. Cholera, typhoid fever, and other diseases transmitted by contaminated water or food caused devastating epidemics in the Western world. A story in this connection is related about Dr. John Snow. In the evening of September 7, 1854, Dr. Snow proposed to the vestrymen of St. James Parish in Golden Square in London that the handle be removed from the Broad Street pump. The vestrymen were dubious. All the residents had filled their pictures at this pump for generations. But within 10 days, 500 people had contracted cholera. So at Dr. John's insistence, they stopped the pump's fowl flow and cholera disappeared from Golden Square. This early triumph and many subsequent discoveries at last awoke the public and their legislative representatives to the need for sanitation. And since then, state and local boards of health have been given the authority to control the purity of supplies of food and water. The result has been the virtual elimination of water-borne infection in this and other of the more progressive countries of the Earth. The result of application of sanitation has not been quite so good with food-borne diseases. Although here again, great progress has been made. It is now recognized by almost everyone that food and food utensils can carry the germs of tuberculosis, brucellosis, scarlet fever, diphtheria, and a variety of other diseases. And sanitary programs for control of the handling of food in restaurants and markets meet with general favor. However, even in the decade closing in 1948, some 3,000 epidemics were traced to milk and other food. Constant vigilance is called for. Fortunately, the rapidly improving methods of refrigeration help tremendously to prevent the growth in foods of dangerous bacteria. The pasteurization of milk is being practiced widely, although not as widely as desirable. Some 50 percent of the fluid milk sold today has not been pasturized. Although in 5 states and in 500 cities, milk pasteurization is compulsory. It should be universal. The negative effects of food on health. The food environment has both positive and negative effects on health. I am coming to the positive effects, namely improvement of health through better diets. But first, on the negative side, in addition to the hazards from imperfect sanitation, I must mention hazards that attend the use of additives to food. Some such additives are incidental, others are intentional. Lead and arsenic used in spraying fruit trees, DDT, and other organic chemicals for control of insects leave residues on foods which may be poisonous. These are the incidental additives. Intentional additives include not only certain health guiding, vitamins and minerals, but also mold inhibitors, antioxidants, bactericides, emulsifiers, synthetic flavors, sweeteners, and artificial coloring. Many of these practices are advantageous, others are deleterious. All of them demand and are receiving the attention of nutritionists and sanitarians. Contrary to some hysterical statements made mostly by food faddists, no harm of serious consequence is apparent at the moment from the use of these additives. This is a conclusion recently announced by the Food Protection Committee of the National Research Council's Food and Nutrition board. The report of that committee is based on extensive study of the problem and on a review of the evidence presented at the hearings of a congressional committee and at other hearings held by the Food and Drug Administration. It had this to say: "Contrary to some ideas that have been circulated, reliable food processes have not reduced the nutritional quality of our foods or created inferior products through the use of chemical additives. Likewise, there is no evidence that consumption of foods resulting from the use of the new materials in crop production or in the production and processing of foods have created mysterious disease epidemics or endangered the health of the people." The report cited 3 examples of the use of intentional additives which the committee regarded as in the interest of public health. The examples were: addition of iodine to table salt, as insurance against goiter; chlorination of drinking water to reduce the decay of teeth; and the enrichment of flour in bread with vitamins and minerals as protection against pellagra, anemia, and other nutritional deficiency diseases. Discussing incidental additives, the report clearly implies that without the use of pesticides, not enough food could be grown to feed the people of this country. Danger is recognized, but it can be avoided by adequate, scientific study and effective regulation. Former tolerance for lead, arsenic, chlorine, and DDT, are expected in the near future. Informal tolerances have been in use for some time. Although the Federal Food and Drug Administration examined many samples of fruit and vegetables in the past year, only 3 were found to exceed the tolerance for lead arsenate and none contained a dangerous amount of DDT. The report asserted further that the manufacturers of these chemicals, the US Public Health Service, the Meat Inspection Service, and the Insecticide Division of the Department of Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration are alerted and on guard against the hazards of chemical additives to foods, and that 40 of the states now have legislation to regulate the use and sale of chemicals. Much more could be related to show the public their legislative representatives and their government's officialdom have been quick to put to work the discoveries coming from research in the realm of sanitation. And also that the hazards from contamination of food and water have thereby been diminished. The negative effects of food today are quickly recognized. I cannot say as much, however, for the application of what is known about the positive effects of food. And yet the maintenance of a satisfactory nutritional environment means not only assuring freedom from contaminants, but attention to the positive effects. For on these positive effects of food depend resistance to disease, the mental alertness of the population, and the vigor of the race. Those who are trained in the science underline nutrition know that the human body requires for growth maintenance and productive activity a mixture of foods of good nutritional quality. In other words, a diet which will supply at regular intervals a minimum of 30 or more nutrients. I should like to review what is meant by nutrients in some detail. We have all heard that foods contain 1 or more of 3 classes of food classes: proteins, fats, and carbohydrates. An example of a nearly pure protein is a white of egg. A nearly pure fat is butter or margarine. And a highly pure carbohydrate is corn starch or common table sugar. The food classes, after their digestion, are absorbed into the body. There successive chemical changes reduce them to component parts with a consequent release of heat and other forms of energy. The energy is measurable in calories. One of the first requisites of a diet is that it supply a sufficient number of calories, not too few. For then weight is lost as the body devours itself to release the energy required for life. And not too many, for in that case, all of the food is not degraded to yield energy and the excess is stored as deleterious fat. I am sure you recall these concepts of the food classes, the proteins, fats, and carbohydrates. But do you know that there's several proteins such as those in meat, beans, cereal, and dairy products differ markedly in composition? Each protein is made up of a variety of amino acids. Not less than 8 of them are essential nutrients, essential not only to life, but also in the sense that they cannot be produced within the body and must therefore be contained in the diet. I need not bore you with their chemical names: lysine, tryptophan, and so on. The point is, that the diet must supply a certain minimum of each essential nutrient to promote growth or to maintain the status quo. And that in general, the animal proteins of meat, eggs, and milk, are superior from the standpoint of the amino acids they contain to the proteins in vegetables. Your food, that is to say, your diet, must provide protein of such quality that the necessary minimum of each essential amino acid is made available. Furthermore, to be of the maximum value, they ought to be provided at every meal. Research has shown that the several amino acids must march along together and be accompanied by the other nutrients, I shall mention, if the tissues are to be used -- are to use them to the very best advantage. With the fats and the carbohydrates, you need not be so much concerned as with the proteins. To a large extent, fats and carbohydrates are interchangeable. Both are sources of caloric energy. And the one can replace the other, except that diets extremely low in fats are usually distasteful and that some fat is required to enable the body to absorb certain other nutrients, namely the vitamins which are soluble only in fat. This brings us to the vitamins and minerals. Foods supply not only calories and proteins but a wide variety of vitamins, such as vitamin B-1 or thiamin, B-2 or riboflavin, C or ascorbic acid, vitamins A and D and many others. They likewise supply mineral salts of sodium, potassium, calcium, iron, and other elements. There is a natural law to which the late Professor Mendel was first to call the Law of Mineral. It is quite as rigid as our other natural laws. This law prescribes a certain minimum allowance for each nutrient. I mentioned before the requirement for a minimum of each essential amino acid, similarly, the law demands a minimum allowance of each of the several vitamins and minerals. I suppose you're wondering how in the name of providence anyone who is not an expert in nutrition can plan his eating so as not to make mistakes in so complex a business. Or how our ancestors without any formal knowledge of nutrition whatsoever managed to survive. The answer is simply that our ancestors didn't do so well, that many of them were not as vigorous and resistant to disease as they might have been with better diets. As Sandburg said in his "Abraham Lincoln, the Prairie Years, The wilderness is careless." Furthermore, we are at a even greater disadvantage in some ways than were our forbearers. In their day, foods were less sophisticated. Their meats, when they got meat, were not, as are some of ours, processed by high temperatures, which effects unfavorably some of the amino acids. Their vegetables were mostly fresh. Some of ours come out of cans and although the canning industry has greatly improved many of its products, some vitamins as well as some amino acids are hurt by processing. The flour used by our grandmothers in baking bread was ground between stones, whereas ours is ground between steel rolls. In consequence, the flour of today is whiter but lower in natural vitamins. Most important is the fact that our forbearers used much smaller amounts of sugar than we do. In one way or another, we consume more than 90 pounds per person annually. Sugar supplies calories, but almost nothing else, no amino acids, no vitamins, no minerals, or at most small traces of these nutrients. The amount of food we eat is determined largely by our capacity for calories. So taking more sugar means taking less of foods containing amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. The nutrients of the diet are diluted by the sugar content. So you see, the nutritional environment has changed in many important ways. In former times, if people got the amount of food they wanted, which wasn't always the case, they usually obtained the nutrients required. Today however, you can fill up on sweets and fats and products depleted through processing and go short with respect to one or several of the essential nutrients. Many people today buying only refined salt develop goiter, because the iodine contained formerly in much of the cruder salt of those times is not present in the refined salt. Or in using margarine in place of butter, you may run short of vitamin A, unless you make sure that the margarine is fortified with this vitamin, which butter naturally supplies. Well, what can be done to improve this positive aspect of the food environment? Actually, something has been done, but more needs doing. Surgeon General Shealy not long ago, remarked that the cultural lag between the enunciation of a new idea and public action based upon it has been estimated as 30 years on the average. It is more than 30 years, however, since Marine and Kimble taught us that our diet was short in iodine and that the shortage was responsible for the prevalence of goiter. A minute amount of iodine put in all our table salt would do much to eliminate this disease. Salt fortified with iodine, so called iodized salt, is on the market, but unless you ask for it, you may not get it. And you have to know about it to ask for it. Why not require that all salt used for eating purposes be iodized? I am reliably informed that all our margarine now is fortified with vitamin A. This is a voluntary program of the manufacturers. But would you inhabitants of New York City be content with a voluntary program for the sterilization of your drinking water or the pasteurization of your milk? Why not require fortification of all margarine so that no one would have to question whether or not it is fortified? In passing such laws, we would only be requiring that essential nutrients be replaced in the diet. Much of our white flour and a considerable proportion of commercial-bakers bread is labeled with the word enriched. And when it is so labeled, it must contain a certain minimum of the nutrients thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, and iron. This flour and bread enrichment program was launched 11 years ago at the instigation of a nutrition scientist of the American Medical Association International Research Council. It was not as has been incorrectly stated here and there, instigated by the millers and the bakers. However, for the extensive development of flour and bread enrichment on a voluntary basis, the flour millers of the country and the large commercial bakers were responsible. The benefit to the public health has been significant. Through roller milling of flour and increased use of sugar, the per head consumption of vitamin B-1 was falling steadily in our country, and had reached a dangerously low level by 1940. With enrichment of bread and flour, which involved restoring the more important vitamins, the per head consumption of thiamin was doubled. And that of niacin and riboflavin materially increased. One sometimes hears the comment that enriched bread cannot possibly be equal to whole wheat bread because we do not put back all the nutrients that are lost from wheat during milling. A side, Dr. Wilder very often interjects this story here: whole wheat bread does you about as much good as a cold shower in the morning, you only think it does. Professor Elvium [assumed spelling], who is looked upon as foremost among the nutrition scientists of the times, point out that the loss of other vitamins is not nearly as great in milling as the loss of thiamin, riboflavin, and niacin, and that these are the vitamins returned to the flour or bread in the process of enrichment. The advantage of enrichment has been widely recognized, and today, 26 of the states have laws requiring that all white bakers bread, all family flour, and in several states, all corn meal be enriched. The virtual disappearance in this country since 1940 of beriberi and pellagra can be attributed in large part to this program. Beriberi and pellagra are the consequences of severe deficiency of thiamin and niacin respectfully. In Bataan, where beriberi took the lives of more than 200 persons every year in a population of only 90,000, the disease virtually disappeared when the white rice which is the common cereal there was enriched with thiamin. Well, now, if the need for increasing the consumption of thiamin, riboflavin, and niacin is so evident, why are we content to depend on a voluntary program which certainly will break down in time as interest in it wains? Why not require everywhere, as today is done in more than half of the states, that all white flour, all white bread, and all cornmeal contain not less than a certain minimum of each of these nutritional essentials? If prevention of the ill effects of poor diets is as important a public health measure as is believed, why not ensure the vitamin and mineral content of every food consumed in quantity? How can it longer be considered reasonable to permit the marketing of foods which fail to carry the nutrients we should find in them? Education of the public in nutrition is helping to secure more widespread use of better diets. But education in nutrition fails to reach many who need it most. For the nutritive quality of the foods which are consumed in quantity to be assured by regulation, just as the purity of the water and the milk we drink, the nutritional environment thereby created would make it difficult for anyone to go wrong, instead of, as at present, requiring special education to go right. The concept that by controlling our environment we may improve the public health is nothing new. The novelty today is that we now possess more knowledge of our relation to our surroundings and have acquired not only more technology but more experience. The value to the public health of controlling what the people have to eat has been demonstrated convincingly in England since the beginning of World War Two. Among the indexes of public health are infant mortality, maternal mortality, and the death rate from tuberculosis. In all other wars, these indexes worsened badly. But in World War Two, in England, they improved. There were fewer infant deaths, fewer women died in childbirth, and the death rate from tuberculosis fell. This occurred despite a serious housing problem, the crowding of people in the purely ventilated bomb shelters, the shortage of physicians, the increased anxieties, and some unavoidable relaxation of sanitary regulations. The only environmental factor unaffected for the worse was the available food which was improved. With food imports curtailed as they were, the government was obliged to assume responsibility for all food distribution. In consequence, the science and nutrition could be put to work on a gigantic scale. Rationing meant that everyone received his share. And this share were several items, notably: milk, meat, and eggs, represented more, much more than many people previously could afford to buy. There were also special dispensations for groups with special needs: pregnant women, children, the sick, and persons engaged in very heavy occupations. Also the nutritional quality of all bread was improved. And the margarine was fortified with vitamin A. They did not enrich their flour and bread as we have done, instead, they turned to undermilling of their flour. The people did not like its baking quality or its coarse gray appearance. But they used it and they benefitted from it. Undermilled flour mulls more easily than highly milled white flour. But this was less of a problem in England than we found it to be here, as the weather there is cool most of the time, and thereby their bread does not spoil. Consequent to this control of the positive effect of the nutritional environment, maternal mortality, deaths in infancy, and deaths from tuberculosis declined, as I have said. Also the health of the people was conspicuously benefitted in other ways. This was determined by physical examination of the children in schools where similar health surveys had been conducted in pre-war years. Early in 1944, the government of Newfoundland, aware that many of the people of that island country were suffering from poor diets, decided to demand enrichment of flour and fortification of their margarine. As a check on the effect of this procedure, a group of physicians was invited to make examinations of a sample of the population in 1944 and again in 1948. The group of which I was a member, was composed of specialists in nutrition from the United States, Canada, and England. Surveys were conducted on the Eastern coast of Newfoundland in August 1944, very soon after enrichment of the flour started, and again in August 1948. More than 800 persons were examined in each of these years. They represented a fair sample of the population. The contrast between the condition of the people in 1944 and in 1948 was striking. The prevalence of the outward and visible signs of vitamin deficiencies was more than half. The reddened weepy eyes, the cracked and swollen lips, and the beefy tongues so conspicuous in 1944, had largely disappeared by 1948. Some abnormalities were still as prevalent, but these, notably red, swollen, bleeding gums, and tiny bleedings around the hair follicles of the skin could be attributed to deficiency of vitamin C, and nothing of significance had been done to increase consumption of vitamin C. The bread was enriched only with thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, iron, and calcium, and the margarine only with vitamin A and D. Chemical analyses of the blood and urine established beyond doubt that the vitamins added to the flour and margarine had reached the people. The values for thiamin in the urine and for vitamin A and riboflavin in the blood were very low in 1944, but satisfactory in 1948. Whereas the blood values for vitamin C, which could not be added to the flour or margarine, were even lower in 1948 than they were in 1944. Improvement was noted not only in the more measurable signs of abnormalities, but also in the additives of the people. They were more alert and more active. This was especially notable among the children. Gone to a great extent was their former apathy and they no longer waited patiently for their examinations. And unless they were shooed away, they clustered around the examiner's tables, interested and curious as children ought to be. They swarmed over the decks of our motorboat when we docked at outports and had to be herded off or shooed off. Also they engaged in games and play, whereas the absence of play had been noted before. Observations similar to these were made quite independently by another group of nutrition specialists who examined the inhabitants of a village on the western coast of Newfoundland in 1944 and again in 1948. And when at last the health statistics had been compiled for 1948, it was found that those indexes of public health of which I referred as showing improvement in England, had improved in Newfoundland. The very high infant mortality had been almost halved. Maternal mortality had fallen greatly, as had the death rate from tuberculosis and the general death rate. Here in the United States one finds among the educated classes, which includes most of our physicians, a tendency to ignore the importance of nutrition as a problem. We have an abundance of edible, and priding ourselves on being the best fed population in the world, we conclude that we are abundantly nourished. There are indications that this judgement may be wrong. For instance, the food consumption studies of the Department of Agriculture, which are conducted every few years, although recently showing some improvement, always reveal that a fairly large proportion of the people eat diets that are poor with respect to 1 or several essentially nutrients. Similarly, in New York city, where 5 nutrition clinics are established, the number of sickly people referred by physicians far exceed the number that can be adequately treated. Also here and there the country over, sporadic nutrition surveys involving physical examinations have been made, and with rare exceptions, have revealed an incidence of malnutrition of considerable proportions. Finally, a great concern for many was the extraordinary high incidence of rejects for military service in World War Two. That poor nutrition was in part responsible is scarcely to be doubted. However, in our country, we have had no periodic examinations of the people to tell us whether their nutritional status has improved or worsened in the past 10 years. And 10 years from now, if our efforts to assess nutritional health are no more systematic than they have been, we shall continue in our ignorance. As a part of any program undertaken to improve the nutritional environment, a periodic health survey ought to be included. A satisfactory program would involve annual or even more frequent physical examinations of a scientifically selected sample of the population. The examinations to be made by physicians who have been trained to recognize evidence of nutritional ill health. The program also should include research activities to improve methods for the diagnosis of malnutrition. The responsibilities for such activities rest squarely on our public health authorities. They, however, for lack of budgetary funds, must move slowly until the public and their legislative representatives come to understand that the positive effects of the food environment are just as important to the public health as the negative effects. In summary, I have emphasized that man, through the exercise of his intelligence, has modified his nutritional environment to meet his needs. Without this, life today for most of us would be impossible. Of great importance recently, as I pointed out, has been the insistence by the public on control through sanitation of food and water borne diseases. By this means the negative or deleterious effects of food have been minimized. On the positive side, however, progress has been slow. The public and their legislative representatives have not become aroused to the fact that resistance to disease, mental alertness, and the vigor of the race are dependent on the quality of the diet. So the food environment still leaves much to be desired with resulting ill effects on public health. Education is proceeding and is very helpful, but nutrition education fails to reach many of those who need it most. The nutritive quality of those foods which are consumed in quantity by everyone should be assured by regulation just as is the purity of milk and drinking water. And with such regulation, the nutritional environment could be adjusted so that it would be difficult for anyone to go wrong instead of requiring as at present education and constant attention to go right. Thank you.

[ Applause ]

>> I think some of you may wish to have copies of this lecture later on, and of the other lectures which were delivered in the series. And I think it's the intention of the Committee on Laity Lectures to publish these in 1 volume as they've done in the past. So you may have these excellent reviews of the progress of medicine in particular fields in your own library. I'm very proud to have most of the past ones in my own. Now the time has come for questions, and I'm ready to hear some oral questions while we wait for your written questions. Does anyone have a question to raise concerning this most interesting of all subjects in the field of public health?

[ Inaudible Question ]

This is, you'll admit, quite a question. I think I'd have to be familiar with foreign affairs if I were to try to answer the first question, because I don't know exactly what animated the Canadian government if they did indeed pass such a law as our questioner has indicated. I can tell them, however, that I was in Washington on the Food and Nutrition Board approved the enrichment of white bread and white flour, and that no one on the Food and Nutrition Board and no scientists that I knew anything about in Washington, and I was quite familiar with the situation, resigned from the Board. Now, I think if you don't mind, we pass on to some of these questions, and I'm going to ask Dr. Norman Jolliffe [assumed spelling] to join me in answering them.

[ Silence ]

Here's a question which bears upon the question that's already been asked: Is there advantage in the Cornell load of bread over that just labeled enriched? And Dr. Jolliffe, I know that this is a subject with what you're familiar.

>> There is a possible advantage of the Cornell loaf over the plain enriched loaf in that it has a higher content of dry skim milk, it also has a higher content of wheat germ and a higher content of yeast. The increase -- these were offered in to increase the protein, and it has increased the protein from about 9 percent to 11 percent.

>> The next question, Dr. Jolliffe, is: Are there certain foods which arthritis patients should avoid? I prefer not to answer that question.

>> It seems to me as though that belongs in the medical meeting.

>> Yes. Of course there are all kinds of different forms of arthritis and it would be rather difficult for even such intelligent persons as Dr. Jolliffe and I to generalize on this subject. And here's a question, which is a public health question: What is or will be done to prevent trichinosis in pork, in processing pork, the question reads.

>> I would like someone else to answer that.

>> Well, I think the answer is that a great deal is being done at the present time by inspection, but that all fresh pork, if I understand the problem properly, must be well cooked to be sure that trichinosis does not result. I don't think there's much danger in this country, but I may be quite wrong. I appeal to the distinguished person sitting at the rear here to correct me if I'm wrong. And here we have another question: Is there any such thing as a diet for arthritis? Which I think we have to pass over. And here's a question: Please let me know whether arthritis is due to emotional factors or poor nutrition.

>> Dr. Boudreau, there's been so many questions here on arthritis, maybe we can say something. Of course, there are many, many varieties of arthritis. There is 1 common variety of arthritis known many years ago due to lack of vitamin C. Now, there is relatively speaking little ascorbic acid deficiency in this country. Or put it this way: There is little arthritis that can be attributed to a vitamin C deficiency in this country. Some people believe that a considerable amount is due to ascorbic acid or vitamin C deficiency, most people think that it is a minimal amount.

>> This is a question which appeals to me in some ways: Is there any reason with the widespread advantages of high-quality protein why boudin blood should not be used as human food if prepared in attractive form, tasteless and odorless?

>> Well, I'm perfectly sure if you go down to Macy's, I've purchased it there, they have blood sausages made of boudin blood. They're very delicious if you like them, most people don't like them though.

>> And the second question on this list: Would you comment on Dr. Roger Williams' theory in regard to individuals with much higher than normal vitamin requirements as explained in "Nutrition and Alcoholism." Alcoholism is a subject with which I'm not prepared to deal. Perhaps you are, Dr. Jolliffe.

>> I prefer to leave alcoholism alone at this time.

>> For good health, what proportion of protein, fats, and carbohydrates are required?

>> I think it's generally considered that a person should have about 25 percent of his needs from protein, somewhere around 70 or 80 grams a day. And as Dr. Wilder explained in his lecture, the energy requirement it made little difference whether you derived it from fat or from carbohydrate; they were largely interchangeable as long as you had a minimum amount of each. Enough carbohydrate to burn up the fat, and enough fat to ensure the palatability of food and to ensure the absorption of certain fat soluble nutrients.

>> What book, in your opinion, describes in the most correct manner that most meets with your approval how a person shall eat and otherwise live in order to have good health and a good happy healthful long life? I think we leave out 1 part of that. How a person shall eat, I think we can advise some of you on, but otherwise live is a different matter. I suggests that you see your clergymen for that.

>> Certainly, I don't believe that any of those that have been widely advertised in recent months or years could be recommended by anyone here. Another question: If a man finds he feels better when he makes it a permanent practice to eat nothing 1 day every week but only to drink water on that day, will such a practice if carried on for many years injure or improve his health?

>> I don't think anyone's going to say that that will injure your health, certainly it would do far less damage than to have just a little bit of sugar during that day. It's more important that you have what you eat balanced than to have nothing at all. That is over a very short period of time such as a day, as he mentioned.

>> Now, here's a question: Can overindulgence in vitamins and minerals can one overindulge in vitamins or minerals? Or are excess vitamins and minerals merely excreted or are they harmful to the body?

>> There's very definite evidence that excess of certain vitamins and of minerals can do damage. For example, the mother who is an enthusiast in nutrition, the doctor tells her to give her infant 5 drops of a vitamin D concentrate, thinks that if 5 drops would do the infant good, then he gives the infant 5 teaspoon fulls, well, there has been evidences of intoxication of vitamin D and of vitamin A. Certainly there's been evidence of too much calcium at times.

>> Dr. Jolliffe, do you know the story about the polar bear livers with the vitamin A, don't you? I think the audience might be interested in that.

>> The only the story that I know is that from eating the polar bear livers, people sometimes get acute intoxication of vitamin A. Now, I don't know the story.

>> Well, that's the story, that's the story. The polar bear liver is very rich in vitamin A, and explorers that had a liking for liver have suffered as a result. Can diabetes as a family trait be forestalled by adequate dietary measures from youth throughout adult life?

>> This person qualified the answer, diabetes as a family trait, I would rather turn that over to Dr. Pollack. Is he here?

>> Dr. Pollack isn't here. I think that's rather a medical than the public health question.

>> Very difficult problems. Here is what can happen though: is that the diabetes that occurs after 40, not particularly as a family trait, can largely or in most instances be prevented by staying at your normal weight.

>> Now, here's a question which Dr. Jolliffe is particularly qualified to answer. It is: What are you finding the most deficiency is at present in New York City?

>> Ascorbic acid and vitamin A. Of the -- and if you want to call over-calorie nutrition as a deficiency, then that leads all the rest.

>> I think another name for that is obesity; is it, Doctor?

>> That's right.

>> Do you regard natural poisons which are present in some foods a serious nutritional problem?

>> Well, you usually don't eat those foods. I don't know of people going out and eating toad stools on purpose.

>> Now, this is natural poison which are present in some foods. I don't know exactly what is referred to.

>> No, I don't either.

>> Can alcoholism be treated nutritionally?

>> I'd rather not answer that, I don't think so.

>> It has been treated, you know, you might call it emotionally, psychiatrically, the Alcoholics Anonymous, which is really a psychiatric form of treatment, with very great success.

>> And some of the effects of alcoholism, namely malnutrition, can be treated nutritionally.

>> May lack of certain vitamins in human food influence the structure of genes? If so, can we control inheritance characteristics through foods?

>> I don't know the answer to that question.

>> I don't either, and I'm afraid that no one does know the answer to that question. Now, is milk considered a bad food for adults?

>> Recently, there is a considerable emphasis being placed upon cholesterol as being important, that is excess cholesterol being important in the development of atherosclerosis. I think it is very important, however, to realize that cholesterol comes primarily from fat, and it is primarily the fat that is stored in the body, the excess fat that is stored in the body. And as cornered out by Dr. Glenn King very recently, it is not the cholesterol, if cholesterol does the damage, that is in some meat and some milk and some eggs, but the cholesterol that is synthesized by your body from that extra 10, 15, or 20 pounds of fat that you have in your body which is put there ordinarily by eating too much sugar.

>> You've been listening to the George R. Seidenberg Memorial Lecture on the Evolution of Nutrition, written by Dr. Russell M. Wilder, Director of the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolism Research and a member of the United States Public Health Service at Bethesda, Maryland. Dr. Wilder being unfortunately ill, his friend, Dr. Norman Jolliffe, read Dr. Wilder's manuscript. Tonight's Chairman was Dr. Frank G. Monroe. This has been the final lecture in this current series of Lectures to the Laity, presented by the New York Academy of Medicine for the public free of charge. The lectures have been broadcast by your city station direct from the auditorium of the New York Academy of Medicine as a public service. We return you now to our studios in the Municipal Building. This is the Municipal Broadcasting System.

>> Is better for you than white flour, even when it's enriched with the vitamins. But if you all feed white bread as it is made in ordinary practice and feed the whole wheat bread as it is made ordinarily commercially, you'll find that the white bread will be better for you than the whole wheat. Why? Because there is not 1 percent of the whole wheat bread made with milk powder, while 95 percent of all white bread is made with milk powder. So even though whole wheat flour when fed to animals or to man will be better than white enriched flour, not so the bread as in commercial practice.

>> Here's a question: Is the large scale feeding of canned baby foods good nutrition? And this is of particular interest to grandfathers.

>> Of what kind of food?

>> Canned baby foods, canned baby foods. You know, these foods that come in cans.

>> I don't think there's anything wrong with canned baby foods, if that's all you can eat, I would much prefer to eat something that had some chewing quality on it. But if you have no teeth or through some other reason that you must have it, you'll do all right.

>> Has much of the value been removed when vegetables are frozen?

>> I don't think that much of the value has been removed, if any.

>> I think as a matter of fact, if I may supplement my friend Dr. Jolliffe's opinion, the foods are taken at the right time when they have their full content of vitamins and they're frozen at that time. And in the frozen state they lose practically none. Foods lose a great deal if they're not frozen in the course of storage. Lettuce, for example, coming across from California, loses a great deal of its vitamin A. What are some of the best foods to eat when one has a cold?

>> Go to bed and drink some orange juice, I think, and throw a toddy in, if you're of a certain age.

>> Now, here's question that neither Dr. Jolliffe nor I are going to answer, because our lawyer isn't present tonight. The question is: What is your opinion about the many dieticians who speak over the radio? And here's a question which Dr. Wilder would love to answer if he'd been here: Does the nutritional deficiency affect the emotional status of people? Well, I can give you one simple answer: When you get hungry, you're not emotionally as stable as you were when you were not hungry. Now, you carry on from there, Doctor.

>> I think that's almost enough, but it is very evident in the nutritional survey that Dr. Wilder called attention to, on the very first survey in 1944, the children were good children. You could line them up around the school room and they would never break out of line. You line up some New York City school kids around the room and not have a monitor there and see if they stay in line. But in 1948, when they came back, they couldn't line them up. They were as children should be; they were ornery; they were [inaudible] they were active, they didn't just stand and gape at them. They asked questions; they put them on the boat, they were explorers, they were interested. There's no question about the influence of nutrition on certain of the emotions. Matter of fact, I think that one of the reasons some of the older people think that this modern generation of children are terribly spoiled is because they're so much better nourished. Now, here's a question and I think it will probably be the last question that we consider tonight because it's getting on a little bit, we don't want to try your patience too much. This is a very complicated question. I'm going to ask Dr. Jolliffe to answer it. Has the improvement in nutrition also to a considerable extent improved the incidence of dental caries in the United States and England?

>> It improved the incidence in that it improved that made it higher or made it lower?

>> Made it better.

>> Made it better is what they meant. There's been no evidence that, to my knowledge, that the incidence of dental caries has diminished in this country since 1940.

>> Some of the best fed countries in the world, we always speak of New Zealand and Australia as being some of the best fed, with the longest expectancy of life at birth, have the worst teeth. And some of the people living on certain islands have very good teeth. No one knows what the explanation is. But we also have the fact that certain pediatricians in Iowa, for example, give the children a diet, who are under their care, can give them a diet, which will prevent dental caries. Now, the whole thing is a puzzle, there's so many factors associated with dental caries. And we're getting out a book, the Food and Nutrition Board, to which both Dr. Jolliffe and I belong in Washington, is getting out a book on the nutritional aspects of dental caries. And you can subscribe for it, I think it will cost about $12, and be full of technical terms. I'm sure we're all most grateful for your attention.

[ Applause ]

>> I simply want to remind you that if any of you want the publication of these proceedings, you can obtain them later by communicating with Dr. Galston, the Secretary of this committee on Laity Lecture. This terminates the series for this year and we will welcome you next year to next year's series. Good night.

[ Applause ]



