>> Has really devoted the last almost 30 years to the sick in the field of psychiatry. He was a pioneer shortly after [inaudible] in problems with insulin, and shock therapy. He was also a pioneer in psychotherapy in terms of having really initiated day hospitals for psychiatric patients. These patients returning to their homes at night. He also initiated fascinating therapeutic procedures involving manipulation of the immediate environment of the patients. For the past years our guest has been, and currently is, the Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry at Yale University, Psychiatrist in Chief of the Royal Victoria Hospital, and he's Director of the Allan Memorial Institute of Psychiatry in Montreal. It gives me the greatest pleasure to introduce to you Dr. Ewen Cameron who will talk to us tonight on the intriguing subject of Life is for Living. Dr. Cameron.

[ Applause ]

>> -- is pretty good for the seating. [Inaudible].

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Ladies and gentlemen, I am forbidden to talk until I get the signal that we're on the air, so you'll excuse me if I was looking at you and concentrating my title for a few minutes until we get on the air. I might say something about this matter of income tax and say [laughter] that it cannot be arranged, I'm sorry to say. We had tried our entire treatment [inaudible] to arrange it, but it can't. I pay I think either four or five income taxes. Ready?

[ Inaudible Speaker ]

The hard way. I was asked how I'd pay it. And I had to say I paid it the hard way.

>> Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. In cooperation with the New York Academy of Medicine, your city station brings you the fourth of the season's series of Lectures to the Laity. Now in their 20th season, the lectures are presented by the Academy free of charge at their auditorium from which we're now broadcasting. The talks are intended to acquaint the layman with the new developments and ideas in medicine, to give him an insight into the processes of that development. The lecturers are the scientists whose labors in the field sum up to this progress in medicine. Their talks, though given in the layman's language, lose none of the precision and reality of their scientific basis. This season's theme is medicine in the changing panorama of science. Our speaker tonight is Dr. D. Ewen Cameron, Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Canada, Chairman of the McGill University Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatrist in Chief of the Royal Victoria Hospital, and Director of the Allan Memorial Institute of Psychiatry in Montreal. Dr. Cameron's address is titled "Life is for Living." Dr. Cameron.

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: The Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, this title, "Life is for Living" is an assertion which intimately echoes the tones and speaks the words of which the mid-century has taken resolute possession. It is the saying, "Worn as a badge by a rising number of citizens of this period." A saying which denotes the determination and the direction of our ideas. And those who came before us saw life differently. Some have seen life as work, and to this day, this is how many of their descendents still see it. For them, all preparation for living, all that is learned at school, all that one hears at form, is shaped to that end, that they may live to work. In work they find their security. For them accomplishment is not as it is for the more modern man, an expression of a pleasure which he takes in his own powers. They do not delight as a strong man to run a race. Accomplishment for them is justification. Hence their anxiety to man's endlessly repeated accomplishment, a feverish preoccupation broken by empty periods which are dreaded and avoided and must be filled by any occupation no matter how trivial. Hence, the tiresome turning of work or play into work. The organizing that dreadful word or recreation, the invasion of the home by the wire recorder, the hanging of notepads from the walls of those rooms in the home where you might think the men and women would find themselves most securely seated in biological kinship with the memorial customs of their ancient species. Others again have seen life quite differently. They have seen it [inaudible] of trial, of probation, a testing process, a place where we struggle with good and evil, attending thereby our ultimate rewards. Life for them has been the acquiring of virtue. But we may say that no general agreement has ever been reached about precisely what is meant by virtue. Very clearly, there is to be a restatement within our times as to the nature of man. Equally clearly, this cannot be based upon the private and peculiar views of some sect holding itself precious [inaudible] particularity. It must arise from humanity in general. It must be written against the massive background of the ongoing forging of the world's society, the ordering of which demands ideals and aspirations and premises which can be held in common by all mankind. Down the centuries and around the world today, we may discover agreement on a few virtues: kindness, at least to one's nearest dependents, but carefully reserving classes often large enough to include all of humanity. Classes of those who we feel do not deserve kindness. Courage always accepting, of course, the blind fanaticisms which, unfortunately, it seems it is our enemies who are the most inclined. As soon as we leave behind these few common ideals, we pass into the realm of the purely local virtues peculiar to some particular way of life and which, therefore, serve to separate in bitterness the family of man, the virtuous strict adherence to some special custom, the observation of some peculiar ceremonies at the time of the new moon, the new harvest, the new year or the new baby. For some societies, more active in the search for virtue in ours, life may be all but immobilized by ceremonies, rituals, and taboos. One is reminded of Abner Bean's cartoon entitled "The Accumulation of Virtue." He shows a figure of a hair ribbon, presumably feminine, precariously perched on top of a high and all but toppling tower, a figure totally wrapped up save for head, hands, and one foot, in an enormous bowl of intertangling twine. The wide and anxious pondering, the longing and reaching out for a fuller understanding of our nature so that we may better prepare ourselves to live in the new world which we are opening up, wells from two great sources. First, from our rapidly expanding knowledge of human behavior, and second, from anxious apprehension of a vastness of the powers which we have forged for ourselves, powers capable of at once transforming our times or, if taken over by dark and twisted forces within us, equally capable of the most massive destruction. Let us look back along the path which has brought us to this pivotal point in the historic process. We see in the earlier part of the 19th century the extraordinary and unique flowering of the intellectual activity which we call science and its most fortunate wedding into industry. Coming from this, there has been an enormous increase in things and in power. We are long accustomed to the old wisdom, "Knowledge is power." We have not yet tested the Einstein-like reversal of that statement, that knowledge and power are interchangeable. And yet they are. For the vast powers which we gain as individuals and communities have infinitely increased our capacity to increase knowledge. To a means of transportation and communication which we now possess, we can far more rapidly assemble knowledge than previously. And through our vastly developed administrative techniques we can coordinate the work of hundreds and thousands of individuals can ransack the accumulated wisdom of thousands more from scores of different countries and from a hundred different decades, bringing it to bear upon the solution of a major problem as was done in the case of the development of atomic power. From this great accumulation of things, above all has come leisure. Leisure was formerly the right of only a few. Only relatively few of the many, many bright brains were free in earlier centuries to speculate upon important questions. All but this tiny fragment had to bow their heads continually to the instant necessity of earning enough to eat or finding enough shelter to protect themselves and their families. And still more certainly we were bound and curbed by the continuous anxiety and insecurity of life, by the endless necessity of remaining in the lockstep-like society of the middle ages because in times of scarcity such a society was essential. You could not afford to be different. You could not afford to rock the boat. Now, if we fit ourselves to live in this tremendous century, the possibility exists that more and more of us can be different. More and more of us can be allowed to explore different ways of thinking about things, different ways of dealing with things. From the knowledge we accumulated by the growing social sciences, from their laboratories and research centers, and from the thinking of an ever-increasing number of men and women, there is emerging a conviction that the clearest and most fundamental statement concerning the nature of man is embodied in the assertion that life is for living. This statement carries with it great and far-reaching consequences. The first is that life is its own justification. That we may reasonably find pleasure and satisfaction in the development and the use of our powers as individuals, and together with our neighbors, pass on to further cultivation of what we are built. The second is that we can trust human nature. This can be said despite all the horrors of the World Wars and of a Cold War. The human species has shown a most remarkable capacity to survive and to expand its control over every living thing and over its material world. It would be strange indeed if it could not ultimately control its last remaining threat, namely its own nature. But many of the old premises that still dominate us are based on the belief that you cannot trap human nature, that it must be clipped and tossed into a corseted caricature, especially where it runs most vital -- namely in sex and in aggressive expansion. There is a prevailing fear among many people of what would happen if they let themselves go, of what they might do if there were not a policeman around the corner, a fear of the gossiping neighbors. There is a particularly intense fear mostly among those who have never deviated from a path of extreme abstention that if they were ever to cut loose there would be no stopping them, that they would sink into the most extraordinary debaucheries of a kind that one must feel only a star's mind could dream up. But it is well known to those people who have more confidence in themselves and in their own impulses that to put one's foot upon the primrose path is not necessarily to walk to the end of it. And as we lead after a short time the primroses disappear and the path becomes boring. A third implication which follows on the one we have just looked at is that we can be responsible for ourselves and yet not be overwhelmed by that sense of responsibility. At the present time, such are our cultural beliefs and such is our earlier indoctrination that only a few of us are able to become really independent. For most of us our basis of reassurance must, at least in some measure and for some in very large measure, lie outside ourselves. Some of us are confident mainly because of our families, some because we are doctors, not because we are men or a particular man. Others find their basis of reassurance in the fact that they are Americans or Spaniards. Still others require constant achievement. And without that outside support they are anxiety ridden. As children, it is true that we do need constant support. The world is too great for us, too large, too difficult. We must have the support of our parents' interest and understanding and affection. If we do not have it we are damaged. Later we have to have the approval of our neighborhood and of our school. But for some persons it is then possible to go on to find that basis of approval or security inside themselves. It is true that one may well listen to one's friends and be somewhat concerned if they do not approve. But the lives of all those who have shown great leadership in this long journey of man are records of how these outstanding individuals have passed forward to their great goals often despite the disapproval of their friends or of their families. They have felt that they must be about their business even though with sad regret they have to part company with all those they have cared for and who have cared for them. Theirs is a maturity which is not yet general. If we are to be responsible for ourselves we must also accept responsibility for our social institutions. We must be prepared to see that they are ours, that we built them, that we made them, and can remake them better to serve our ends and those of our neighbors. A last indication of this statement of the nature of man and of his life that I would like to put before you is that we should hold ourselves as being worthy of our own respect and our own affection. Deep within our culture is embedded the belief that man must first love his neighbors and, indeed, love them better than himself. It is true that under special circumstances our societies demand, and perhaps necessarily so, that a man in wartime must be prepared to lay down his life for his neighbor, his family, his community, and his country. But in the day-to-day business of life it is becoming certain that if man does not respect himself and like himself and love himself he cannot like and love and respect his neighbor. He must first accept himself before he can be a good neighbor. Returning to the importance of the concepts which we hold of ourselves, one may say of our earlier beliefs of ourselves that they represent a slow accumulation and a much slower discarding of working premises which men and women down the centuries have used to explain themselves and their world. These working premises were based on rule of thumb methods and in the course of time many of them became twisted away from their original setting. For instance, the concept that one somehow acquires virtue by dietary observance. Others were used to form building blocks of some ecclesiastical system or some traditional footbridge and hence are being perpetuated with the assistance of all the formidable selfpreservatory devices with which these are equipped. One may cite here, for instance, the belief that the brave man is never afraid, that the nice woman is never sexually aroused save for married and then only discreetly. Above all, almost every conception we have had of human nature have been biased by beliefs as to how people should be rather than being grounded upon how they actually are. For instance, there is a wide belief that mothers naturally love their children. Anyone who has the remotest acquaintance with the actualities of human nature realizes that this is far from being the universal case, and that a proportion of women, not only are indifferent to their children, but actively dislike them and wish and sometimes say that it would have been better had they never been born. Our new world demands a revision of our fundamental ideas about ourselves and the rigorous methods of inquiry afforded by the social sciences provides the means for that revision. What are we really doing? Why are we doing it? And where are we going? The world that lies awaiting us is neither easy nor safe. It is most assuredly not safe unless we come to it prepared. It is a world infinitely larger, more promising, more full of powers, maleficent or malignant as we make them. Now we are creatures above all others, aggressive and resolute and determined tremendously to expand our control over this world and all that it promises. When the great forward movement in industry during the middle of the 19th century produced a series of new illnesses, we did not recoil when men and women fell sick and died in great numbers from exposure to metallic dust such as lead. They died from exposure to all kinds of dusts such as asbestos or to industrial gases. But in the end this new industrial realm was made safe. Respirators, blowing apparatus, special ways of grinding, new kinds of material, all considered it to this end of allowing people to do what they could not previously do without danger to health and life. Still another area into which we have cast our way is the great depths and the great heights. Fifty years ago it was hazardous in the extreme to work in the compressed caissons which were necessary for the building of subways and tunnels, and in the rivers where a great deal of water had to be kept back under high air pressure. A hundred years ago the earliest pioneers in the air lost their lives in lack of oxygen. You have read of those first balloon assents where many a man died because he was not aware of oxygen lack. Now these things are at an end and we're able to go with safety 10 miles into the air and a mile or more into the depths of the sea. At this very hour we are engaged in forcing our way into another region where man has never hitherto been able to go with impunity and that is into the area of atomic radiation. We're ready by shielding, special clothing, and by testing every inch of the way. This, too, has become safe for us. This, too, is coming under our control. First are, we have conquered these new realms by modifying them or by protecting ourselves when we enter them. But this new world which lies before us is not one of radiation or of densities crushingly heavy or explosively light, nor yet of corroding chemicals. It is one of unexplored ways of living, of different forms of human relations, of ideas forever opening and expanding into new horizons, ideas of probability and not of certainty, of change and not of permanence. To enter it requires not material modifications, not the protection of the sealed chamber and protective coating, but changes in our very selves. We have come to recognize, and this may be one of the great advances of our time, that the strength which we can build into our personalities, the buttressing which we can set up in our ways of life, will determine how far we can go into this new world, a world waiting for us with such vast powers, such vistas of space and [inaudible] by early voyagers, with promises of control over our destiny which may forever free us from the harassments of illness and loss and the deadening struggle with our neighbors and within ourselves. Those who enter most of that world must first vest themselves of ways of living by years and conceptions which render them immediately vulnerable to his tensions and stresses. To illustrate this, I want to talk to you about certain great weaknesses in the structure of our ways of living, weaknesses which are inevitably repeated in our personalities. They form deep contradictions within us. They create hidden flaws in all of us. Some, under special stress, open up into ever progressing maladjustments to life. Of these great weaknesses I will discuss three. First, our ideas of love and hate; and second, the continuing struggle over the relative importance of what is as contrasted with should be; and third, the difficulties which we run into when we try to substitute the image of a rational man over the realities of a total man. First, with regard to this puzzling matter of love and hate. From our very earliest days our culture is at great pains to set these two up as though they were not only different but were eternal antagonists. We learn almost as soon as we can talk about good fairies who protect and love you and bad witches who hate you and will try to destroy you. Later we are introduced to a variety of gods and devils who, again, exemplify this eternal struggle between love and hate. At sill more sophisticated levels of our lives, we learn to talk about undying and unchanging love, about parents who will always love us no matter what happens, and in the broader field we meet men and women who say that they never fight, that they never quarrel, that they never feel angry, that it is never worthwhile. It is only when we turn from this to a careful study of the matter the doubt begins to creep in. At the beginning of the century there was very little scientific knowledge of the relationship of love and hate and their constant coexistence in the same individual with regard to the same person at the same time. Those [inaudible] as most penetrating of human observers, the parts of an earlier period, had frequently pointed out the ease with which great love turns to great hate. With the rapid growth of our knowledge of the personality this concept of the relationship of love and hate has become general, first, within scientific circles, and now it is beginning gradually to pass out as is common into the field of general public knowledge, although here it is still the possession of only a few. More recently some of us have found it very useful to expand this concept, indeed, to go much beyond it. First with regard to the expansion, we have come to see that all the great emotions, all those great responses which move and sweep individuals such as love and anger and fear, sexual responsiveness, and perhaps pain, might better be put together into a single basic response, namely the intensification reaction, because all of them have much more in common than they have separating them. We have also come to realize that where the relationship between two people has for long been dominated by one or other facet of this intensification response, as for instance being one of hate or intense love or fear, the fact that there has been a relationship, and an intense relationship at that, is more important than the sign. In other words, it is more important in understanding the personalities involved to realize that there has been an intense relationship, than to think in terms of a relationship of hatred or of love. One of the reasons why it is more important is that no matter whether the relationship has been one of love or of hate, the individuals concerned become adjusted and adapted to that relationship. And if one of the individuals is a child then he or she, as she grows, will grow with an adaptation of that kind of relationship and, therefore, with a need for that kind of relationship. This, of course, leads to great confusion in people's minds and great puzzlement about the behavior of such individuals. And since ordinary, everyday thinking would lead one to expect that the girl brought up in fear and hatred of her tyrannical father would, when she married, certainly seek out someone in whom the father is characteristic for not [inaudible]. But this is far from being the case. For either apparently blinding herself in the true situation, she marries someone very like this, or still more strangely, as the marriage progresses, she tends by the expression of her unconscious needs for that kind of person, to invoke in her husband behavior which is at least a similarity to that shown previously by her father. This exceedingly interesting observation has led us to go far past the simple expansion of the older idea of the current systems of love and hate, and has brought us to another which may have even more far-reaching consequences. Since, if it is adopted, we shall see that our ideas of love and hate consist in what might be termed a somewhat premature and superficial description of a far more basic aspect of human behavior, namely of relationship. Many of the -- even the most modern contributions to this field continue to assert that the individual's basic need is for affection. But our studies have brought us beyond this, to the realization that affection is not enough, that still more basic than affection is a need for a relationship which is satisfying to the individual, and that relationship need not necessarily be one in which affection is predominant. Time and again, we have encountered persons who have declared that they had affection showered upon them by their parents, but that they were never understood. And by affection I do not mean simply material gifts but also the time and the devotion, the care, and everything which might seem to outsiders that constitute affection. And yet the person felt himself or herself not understood and consequently was visually resentful and deeply deprived. To grasp this, one must go back to a set of ideas which has never been properly developed, and that is that the individual, the human being, is incomplete in itself. Quite clearly he has functions which cannot be fulfilled except in the presence of others. The function of reproduction is one; breastfeeding is another. And there are many other culturally determined functions such as those which would obtain our equanimity, our peace of mind, to talking things out, which require the presence of others. In each of us, earlier experience determines something of a form which these functions will take, and determines, too, what will satisfy these functions, what will give us a sense of completion. Armed with this, let us now turn back again, and we shall see that what the individual must have from his fellows, his basic need from his fellows, is that he should have a satisfying relationship, and that the form which this satisfying relationship should take depends vastly on his earlier experiences. It may not be at all a relationship of love nor one in which affection is dominant in his manifestations. Since psychiatry is a science which must act as well as study, it is inevitable that one must go forward from this point and say, "What can we do about this continuing confusion concerning love and hate?" Here, then, let me say something which is general. Let me put forward a solution which is applicable to all that we are discussing tonight; namely, the strengthening and pitting of ourselves to enter into our future. We must see to it that the facts which are now pouring out in ever increasing numbers from our great social science laboratories, from our research hospitals and other investigating centers, are made available as rapidly as possible, not only so that they can be used in changing the preparation of our future citizens, our children, but also so that they can be used immediately by those of us in our adult years where many of the crucial decisions still are waiting our hands. There is a natural alliance between the home and the school and the social science research centers. An alliance which has not yet been adequately structured of which must one day be put into operation. Through such an alliance there can be passed out at once the knowledge that we have concerning the inevitable intermingling of love and hate in all our relationships. And we can go beyond this and begin to stress the extraordinary importance of relationship and the fitness of the individual for relationship. Finally, we can take the extremely important step of trying to reach a decision as to the kind of needs which we wish to see set up in our children and can determine at the same time the kinds of ways in which those needs will be met. Let me turn to the second great rift in our cultural pattern, perfected as it is in the personality structure of each and all of us. This is the extremely difficult problem of reconciliation of the "is" and the "ought." This problem, indeed, is so loaded with dynamite, so touchy, that it is quite often left severely alone. But until a good solution is found, an enormous amount of confusion, of personality impairment, and a frank breakdown of the stress is to be expected. It is undoubtedly one of the most dangerous rifts in our cultural pattern. It is occasioned by the struggle for domination on the part of two ways of thinking about ourselves. On the one hand, there is a way of thinking about ourselves in terms of how things actually are. On the other hand, there is its great rival, namely thinking about ourselves in terms of how things should be. One supposes that these two ways have been present from time immemorial. There is no doubt that in certain periods of history, and we are now emerging from one, one or the other of our ways of -- one or another way of thinking about things achieves considerable numbers. It may reasonably be said that the immediately past decades and centuries have seen the supremacy of the way of thinking about ourselves in terms of how things should be. The great advantage of this approach is that it is possible to set up easily applied standards, sometimes too easily applied, is possible without having to go into a great deal of difficulty and detail without and a word having to think too much to say immediately that such and such an individual deviates in his behavior from a given standard, in a word, that he is bad. We have standards for the industrious man, for the good man, for the kind man, and for the generous man. It is possible, also, for the society to set up a system of rewards and punishments by which what we call good deeds can be rewarded, and behavior of which society does not approve, can be suitably punished. One recognizes this procedure running all the way from the nursery school to the penitentiary. One of the great weaknesses of this system, of course, if that its continual insistence in how things should be results in obscuring how things are. For instance, insistence that women should be pure from the sexual point of view means that every woman is intent upon covering up the fact that she does deviate somewhat from the standard. And, in consequence, we get the progressively more and more fictitious picture of the actual sexual behavior of women. And then when somebody does come along, as Kinsey has, and attempts through the best possible means available to describe what is actually happening to women, there is an enormous hubbub, and a vast number of people immediately trying to prove that he is wrong. Well, no doubt, he is wrong in certain respects. But most objective-minded people are inclined to think that he is more right than most people have been before him. One great disadvantage from which this system of thinking in terms of "ought" must of necessity suffer is that his standards, much as because they are, by very considerable emotional forces, tend to get progressively out of date. They are always behind, not only in actual practice, they even fall behind the aspirations of the more enlightened members of a population. And, finally, the author, unfortunately, an unrivaled opportunity for power-seeking groups and organizations to control their neighbors by keeping them in a constant state of embarrassment and uneasiness and the feeling -- the state of feeling anxious and guilty because the standards which are set up are nearly always completely impossible of fulfillment and everybody falls short. Hence, everybody who accepts these standards, and the vast majority of you are apt to feel chronically guilty. Furthermore, such organizations usually have ways of relieving people from feeling guilty. Just hue to the party line and all will be well. Devote yourself and all will be forgiven. One can see that the road here passes very quickly over to authoritarianism with its insistent urge to undermine the whole democratic system. Authoritarianism does not mean to let the individual mature. It is deadly intent upon holding on to a part of the person's basis of security, of controlling his early personality formation in the home, dominating the schools, managing him the morals, and reaching a curving hand into all media of communication. Authoritarianism holds on to part of the individual's sense of security much as it might hold on to a hostage. It will never allow the individual to be the final judge of his own conduct. That has to be decided for him by someone else, by a big brother. As you can readily see, this conflict between viable ways of thinking about ourselves nowadays is greatly sharpened by a variety of things. The first is the great and compelling necessity for us to know the actual facts of human behavior. Nearly everybody wants to know. The mother wants to know the facts of the child/parental relations. She does not want any longer to be given fairy tales about mother love. She wants to know how mothers and children really get along; how they may best get along. The industrialist wants to know all about the human factor in industry. The Army wants to know what men can stand, what percentage losses they can take, how much fatigue, how much protection they can be given by disciplining without risk of destroying initiative. Everywhere you go, whether it is to the courtroom, criminal or divorce court, to the expert in traffic accidents, where it is planned to put over a national sales campaign, everywhere our men and women need to have the facts concern human nature. They want to have a statement about what is. And they don't want to find that they are presented with what ought to be as a substitute for what is. It would be idle and superficial, however, for us to say that the obvious solution is that we should eliminate all thinking in terms of "ought." In actuality, we have to see both the "is" and the "ought" kinds of thinking as aspects of human behavior. And because they are aspects of human behavior both have to be given consideration and given place such as they may have in our march to that great goal of rendering ourselves more efficient and happier. Very briefly, we may say that "is" is a realistic way of thinking, and that "ought" is the idealistic aspect of our thinking. And, again, both have a place. But our idealism and our aspirations have to be based upon the realities of the situation. We cannot possibly set up as ideals things which have not no hope whatsoever of being realized in terms of the facts of human behavior. Hence our first task must be a careful survey of what is actually happening, and then a constant revision of what we would like to see happening. Thereafter we can set up our imperatives in terms of "ought," but they cannot be allowed to become fixed imperatives. They cannot be allowed to become a possession of some power hungry institution. They have to be continually revised as we gain more and more knowledge about ourselves. Let us now look at the third of these great rifts in our social structure from which well up so many difficulties in our personal lives. This third great rift consists in a curious oversimplification of our picture of ourself. To put it in a few words, it consists in our assertion that we are rational individuals, however, untilted individual. As part of the great struggle to increase our control over events, there have been of necessity a continuous centuries-long battle with older, magical, and mystical interpretations and explanations of life and of ourselves. It is a maneuver which seems inherent in mankind that when man comes to a problem which is too difficult and too complex for satisfactory solution, he will attempt, at all costs, to gain some control over the situation, even if he has to resort to a simplification so extreme as to exclude most of the problems with which he is struggling. This oversimplification is represented by the creation of our image of the rational man, man who is guided by logic, who reacts to a given set of circumstances in a predictable way. This conception of a rational, logical man was given tremendous impetus, of course, during the rapid growth of science in the 18th and 19th centuries, and by the rapid expansion of the machine, and the machine in many ways becoming the prototype in which we try to understand ourselves. In the course of the process, a great deal of the pivotal behavior of the individual has to be excluded. Where it was not excluded, it was deprecated. In consequence of this oversimplification there arose a number of ideas which are still with us, and yet they cause us great difficulties because they are so ineffective. Among them is the willpower myth, the idea of it you can do anything that you want to, provided you try hard enough. There is, obviously, a reliance on the machine. You build a machine big enough to do the job you want. If it's not big enough, you build a bigger one. The anxiety and the guilt and the endless frustration in which this myth has [inaudible] in the patient struggling with his illness, the alcoholic to his addiction, and the sexual deviant with his impulses is almost unbelievable. It seems highly problem, moreover, that in the process of repressing what seemed non-rational we have lost a great deal, and perhaps lost particularly in our potential creativeness. We have undoubtedly lost an enormous amount in our capacities to understand ourselves and understand each other. All of us are certainly acquainted with individuals who are completely imperceptive, who simply cannot understand any behavior save at the most superficial level. We know these convention-bound people who cannot think save in terms of the orthodox but who nonetheless carry deeply buried in repression all that [inaudible] added and enriched their lives could it have found expression. Still another consequence of this attempt to suppress important parts of ourselves is that many of us repress so much that it is almost as though we had a second person within us, someone who constantly endangers the first by attempting to take over. This expresses itself in the very widespread fears that you will have of losing control, of losing their minds, and in a still more widespread form, in fears or breakdown and in fears of mental illness. There arises an aversion to mental illness, an aversion spreading out and covering the whole field of mental health, so that this great area of medicine has never had the full public support which it should. We dread what we have controlled [inaudible] so hard to control. The dreads built up by our society which threatens us with the direst penalties if we do not control our instinctive lives. These dreads run to such extremes in our society as to make Robert Louis Stevenson's story of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde one of the widest and most anxiety-laden appeal. Actually, once we have learned to accept what we have so sedulously repressed, once we have made friends with the man within us, we find him far from threatening and indeed and in very effect the completion of our nature. I would suggest, therefore, that the personality of the future must be one capable of tolerating in his awareness a vastly larger proportion of what most of us now are able to carry only in our unconscious. This rather revolutionary idea undoubtedly would bring very extensive changes. But with even less doubt, it would bring with it a great enrichment of living. From what I've said to you, I hope that it will be apparent that our next great adventure, that man's next pioneer mark, will not be into some new continent while there are none, but will be into that vastly promising world of ourselves. Here is the place where all great things are accomplished, where all ideas take form, where all the marches in the last analysis are [inaudible] where there are execution is determined. Without human purpose and planning, no gun would ever be built let alone fired, no atomic bomb would ever take form nor be any threat to us. We are now standing on the shores of an inimitable sea, sea to [inaudible] and shrouded with mystery, the sea across which none but man has strength to steer.

[ Applause ]

>> Dr. Cameron, on behalf of the New York Academy of Medicine, all of us present would like to express our deep appreciation of this lucid, scholarly, and stimulating this station. As we all know, Dr. Cameron has been good enough to [inaudible] to try to answer and to answer questions from the audience. I believe the ushers will pass through the audience and will bring up questions to be answered by Dr. Cameron. I shall attempt to read these questions to Dr. Cameron for his reply. Dr. Cameron, if you'll come up to the podium here. Until these questions reach us, perhaps there might be a question from the floor which Dr. Cameron would be answer for it.

>> [Inaudible] if you don't agree with me, [inaudible] the past week later, including the Bible that indicated that love was the greatest thing in the world, that he would [inaudible] the hidden concept?

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: That's a very difficult and loaded question I concede. I think that what I would be inclined to say would be somewhat obliquely and say that knowledge is constantly unrolling and that we have to look to the future rather than the past for a solution of some of our difficulties.

>> Dr. Cameron, a close related question. Doesn't religion and philosophy have a part in the scheme of "Life is for Living?" Doesn't religion and philosophy have a part in the scheme of "Life is for Living?"

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: I would think so. Sometimes one hears the question raised as to whether psychiatry and other fields in social sciences are at great variance with ways of thinking about things which have had a somewhat longer history. I think one has to say that the objectives with which these earlier systems struggled are still the objectives of which we are struggling and the social sciences are attempting other forms of solution of this -- some of the basic problems of all humanity, and ending up how to live together, how to manage hostility, how to develop a mature personality.

>> Dr. Cameron, [inaudible], if there is already some intellectual awareness of some of quote rifts unquote discussed, how can it be translated into behavior?

>> You call that man. Let me get you --

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: I think, Evan, as I understand this question, how should we go about dealing with some of the rifts which I have outlined for you, I already mentioned the one approach to the problem earlier, namely that answers are slowly coming out of the scientific centers and that these answers I think have to be readily incorporated as they are tested and found valuable in our ways of living. This is something which, of course, is being done everywhere in our daily life. We have brought to bear data which we have gained concerning illness, disease, and have on the basis of that, set up preventive measures and campaigns. And similarly from our great chemical and physical laboratories we have brought data which have been incorporated into communication and transportation and the like. And it's the same sense that I feel that we have now got to a -- give a fuller play to the scientific method as it is applied to human nature. I think all of us who have thought about the applications of the scientific method have seen that it started off with material things, with the matter of astronomy and mathematics, in the matter of chemistry, and then came in rather nervously at the physiology and still more nervously into psychology at the end of the 19th century, but the psychology which was very physiological in nature, and finally has become more and more concerned with some of the basic aspects of human living.

>> Dr. Cameron, you believe then that all behavior is closely related to the subconscious, and that its repression and its repression. But when man realizes this behavior, will he be more stable and predictable?

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: No, I certainly do not, most decidedly not. I may make a confession in this base. I am not a psychoanalyst. But indeed I have often thought that we have rather from an extraordinary degree omitted from our calculations that area in which all great changes take place, all the great reorganizing finds its form and all major synthesis is set up, namely the area of consciousness. So while I have referred to the unconscious several times tonight, I don't want anybody to think that I feel that this is necessarily the major and most admirable part of ourself.

>> We've got a question which is moderately endocrinological, Dr. Cameron. Is an enlarged pituitary gland the cause for emotional disturbances or can the emotions cause the pituitary gland to become enlarged?

>> Dr. Erwin Cameron: [Inaudible] I've heard that question before, somewhere about the hen and the egg. I think the answer's the same.

>> Next question. What attitude toward life should we give to children to make them happy and well-adapted individuals? Adjusted, well adjusted into this order I think.

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Hmph. That's a very large order question. I don't think that could be solved very quickly. But, again, I would refer you to a growing importance that we lay upon the constructive relationship with the child, a consistent, constructive relationship of support and not of criticism, not of withdrawal. Affection should be there. But as I have indicated to you we've begun to feel, some of us have, that a relationship is even more important than affection.

>> Dr. Cameron, in your schedule [inaudible]. I mean the economic insecurity of that [inaudible] accomplished a family where children are not taken care of because mothers have to go to work, you haven't stressed one thing or spoken about the economic structure under our everyday living today, and most families today.

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: The point that was raised here is I haven't stressed the economic structure in discussing the matter of the rearing of children. I think the answer to that is I spoke for 42 minutes. The economic structure obviously is tremendously important but I couldn't bring everything in. I don't think, however, it is rather interesting to know -- notes and some of you must have read Volvi's [assumed spelling] work of -- very familiar with this, that Volvi has constantly pointed out that even in homes where there is great economic deprivation, as long as there is a satisfying relationship between the child and the parents, much less damage is occasioned than one might imagine. Now this should not for one brief moment be taken as an encouragement towards poverty, but of poverty, but rather to bring out a point that relationship is again the fundamental thing. And I spoke about fundamental things because my time was limited.

>> I'm afraid I can't read all of this next one. Perhaps the individual who wrote it could fill in the end. Perhaps Dr. Cameron could read it. Would Dr. Cameron explain further what he meant by the mature individual who rises above disapproval. May it not be a form of aggression and defiance, and not a healthy --

>> Not like a form of behavior.

>> -- form of behavior?

[ Inaudible Speaker ]

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Yes, that certainly -- it might well be. But if you will remember, I hope you do, some of the other things I have said, you will recall that I pointed out that the individual's not complete in himself, that he has to work in relationship with others, and that he has constantly to seek and balance between his own needs for independence and the welfare of his neighbors. He thought [inaudible] as we all know reasonably well. There is not such a conflict as it might seem on the surface. It's much more verbal than action.

>> Well, what else can the human being resort to if not willpower alone, Dr. Cameron?

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Well, I don't know how to apply willpower. I think it's more than that. I think it's a very interesting point is very obviously that the highly motivated individual can do things which the less highly motivated individual can do. But, clearly, there are limits. No husband from my exercising of the willpower can make his wife be quiet [laughter]. It's not strong enough. He's got limits. I think I satisfied nearly everyone so I won't say anything more [laughter].

>> Dr. Cameron, what are some of those important parts of ourselves that we tend to suppress?

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Well, I mentioned some of them. I mentioned that we tend to suppress among other things our aggressive drives. Now this word "aggressiveness," of course, is a very difficult word because it has several sets of meanings in our society. One of them, of course, is an unpleasant one, the matter of sadistic hostility and so on. But it has another more favorable connotation meaning of getting on, getting on with the thing, getting going, getting up off the seat of one's pants, and getting moving, and -- or aggressively going out after a relationship and going out to meet people and the like. Now, that -- a type of drive in many of us is repressed. We are told it isn't the thing to do. It's a -- I must sit still and be quiet, and the like. I don't need to mention, I think, the extent to which, still, the sexual impulses are also severely repressed by our society. We haven't found good solutions for this drive and, hence, much of it is repressed, particularly as you know, in women.

>> Dr. Cameron, in the search to better ourselves, can an individual honestly achieve these objectives by himself, or must he first find others to help him clarify questions he cannot answer himself, such as group analysis, help in psychiatry, and so forth?

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: I would be very sorry to think that one needed the help of a psychiatrist to obtain these things. I think that these sort of changes which I'm talking about tonight are changes which are continually going forward in any live and vital society. And I'm simply attempting tonight to crystallize for you some of the things which seem, at least to me, to be going forward. You'll hear other people crystallizing in somewhat differently. And out of the many attempts to blueprint the direction in which our society is emerging, there will become some consensus of opinion. Not mine, not somebody else's, but some general massive changes will go forward in our society. And as they go forward, individuals go forward with them. But there is, to my mind, far too much tendency to rely on the group, on others, on -- as one man was saying to me the other day and he come from [inaudible] industry, he said, "You know, the old days, the [inaudible] is gone. When you come to a difficult decision, what do we do? We set up a committee to study it." Now that's the kind of business that I think is actually prevalent in our society now. We are inclined to live through committees. And committee living is pretty stultifying.

>> Dr. Cameron, you recommend changes in female pattern of sexual repression under our form of society. Would you recommend future man's lack of inhibition along the pattern of Gloria Somebody with whom I'm not acquainted? I don't know if that be the name, but [laughter].

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron. Now that's been a -- the Chairman said that his function was to pick out of this bunch. Now all of those that you've been most acutely embarrassing to the speaker [laughter] -- and as you see he has one here [laughter]. I think that I'm inclined to say here is that very clearly there has been a continual shift in the sexual customs of women within the last half century and longer. As to where it is going, I would be inclined to say one might study where it has come from, and to ask the speaker and the audience, would they be particularly enthusiastic about a return to how things used to be at the end of the 19th century? There's -- I think, is the answer to this question.

[ Applause ]

>> Dr. Cameron, if a child needs the mother or father's emotions, he has had -- no. I'm sorry. You can read this better than I can, Dr. Cameron. Has had adjusted -- oh, Dr. Cameron [laughter].

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: I see this wasn't embarrassing enough for the Chairman to read [laughter]. It's -- if a child needs a father's emotions, he has to be -- there's two hases. He has adjusted to which he must -- most likely need. I really can't read it either [laughter].

>> Just as long as you can't read it either, Dr. Cameron, I feel relieved and less repressed. Well, Dr. Cameron, I hope this one won't be embarrassing. The title of your lecture is "Life for Living." Most people only work and eat, but do not really live because of their placement in society. How does this lecture apply to that, or to what you would suggest to alter such circumstances? I think this is a blow at socioeconomic question.

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Well, I don't agree with the basic premise because if everybody worked and ate, I don't believe there'd be going to be [inaudible] this moment. The -- can I see the rest of the questions? [Inaudible] first caught my attention.

>> I'm sorry.

>> Dr. Ewen Cameron: Well, going on beyond that, though, there is a very, very serious and important problem coming up because we're entering into a period that where there's going to an enormously greater amount of time available for people. There is going to be -- the work period as we know is progressively shortening, and what are we going to do with it? I think we are already doing something about it. I began asking to think back, those of us who can, some 20/30 years ago, and to the kind of schooling which was in existence then, and compare it to what is now available. I would think you would see that perhaps all unknown and all unpremeditated, the kind of schooling has shifted from a preparation for work to a preparation for living, that more and more subjects are appearing in the school curricula which ticket the individual for relationship, for interests of a nature lying much outside his work. And I would be inclined to feel that this is going to be one of the big challenges of the coming decades, namely to organize the increased amount of time which we have. That is what I was referring to when I said that there are so many more people with time free to think now. It is -- that's almost impossible for us to imagine how it was in an earlier period when there were literally not enough of anything, of any of the things of life to go around and, hence, the greater part of time had to be spent in trying to produce those things. Now we have time free to think and there will undoubtedly arise a vast expansion of avocations, a vast expansion of cultural interests which are only finding their beginning now. I think perhaps we can trace suppressed indications of that in the expansion of organized sport. I would be inclined to think were our great grandfathers to look on the scene nowadays they would be astonished at the amount of organized sports and organized amusement which is now present. It is going all the time. Obviously this is not necessarily one of the most creative ways in which to utilize the human intelligence and brains and so on, and I would think that it is only one of the first and most shall we say -- I would hesitate to say primitive, but beginning ways of utilizing the ever increasing amount of time which is no longer required for earning enough to eat and enough to shelter us.

>> Thank you very much, indeed, Dr. Cameron. I think we'll have to close the question hour and the questions which have not been answered by Dr. Cameron on the platform will be answered by mail. I should like to ask Dr. Kize [assumed spelling] to close the meeting. Thank you very much, Dr. Cameron.

[ Applause ]

>> I wish to repeat the statement that has just been made. If there were questions which have not been answered, if you will address those questions to Dr. Gallstone in care of the Academy, an endeavor will be made to answer them. As you can see from the program, on Wednesday, February 2, the next lecture will be held, and it will be a Review of Psychomatic Notions by Dr. Alvin B. Stokes, Professor and Head of the Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Canada.

[ Applause ]



