>> History of dermatology by Herman Goodman, natural science and doctor of medicine of New York City. Dr. Goodman, nominated by the offices and advisory committee of the section of dermatology and syphilology prepared this short history of dermatology for the radio series of the New York Academy of Medicine. Dr. Goodman practices his specialty of dermatology and cosmetology in our city. His hobby is historical investigation. He wrote extensively on the specialty and on the hobby. His books include, "Treatment of Common Skin Diseases", "Your Hair", "Common Skin Diseases", "Dermatologic Formulary : a Medic Recipe book" and "Cosmetic Dermatology". In the historical field he published "Story of Electricity" [inaudible], "Notable Contributors to the Knowledge of Syphilis" and "Notable Contributors to the Knowledge of Dermatology". The history of dermatology. Dermatology is the study of the skin. It's presumed it means the skin and the hair and the nails and health. There is a pathology infers these structures and disease. For the most part dermatology is considered as a contraction of dermatopathology. In our time cosmetology is the equivalent of dermatology. The history of dermatology, dermopathology really began when man first observed and classified. You may rightfully say this is a beginning of all physical sciences, observation, classification. We must add recording to justify the word science. Further you must accept this statement. No one fact. No one person has been alone. Each contributor to the knowledge required the aid and assistance of those preceding him or contemporary with him. Back to reality could not become a science until the microscope was perfected. Legal dermatology is an ancient science. The skin was accessible to observation. Classification into healthy skin and diseased skin was obvious. Records were made and still in existence dating from the glory that was Babylon and King Hammurabi. He was born as many years prior to Christ as the years since birth to the Savior. On the records of observation and classification and treatment are found in the taggers of Ashurbanipal of a Syria; the date 7 centuries before Christ. The ancient Persians and Venetians observed, classified, treated and recorded facts on skin, hair and nails. Our own William Allen Pusey, 1865-1940 wrote, "Skin diseases are true to themselves upon the attention in a way very few others do". And none of man's medical efforts happened much earlier than those to relieve its itching and to get rid of sores and parasites that afflicted the skin. Everyone recall Hippocrates; 460-377 BC. Few remember the basis of his fame, rested on his shoulders Anaximander of Miletus; 611-457 BC with his concept of primordial body sepses. Alcmaeon of Croton about 500 BC with his moist and dry, warm and cold fundamentals. And Pythagoras 580-489 BC and his follower, Empedolcles 490-430 BC who proposed the four basic elements earth, air or spirit, water and fire. Hippocrates listed a series of conditions of the skin and disease. He left his name for the most part. We guessed more or less accurately that the conditions were in his day compared to those that are today. There was no language of dermatology. No alphabet. Recall we're telling all the things as they were 2,500 years ago. Philosophers, priests, poets and princesses act as physicians. Each influenced an art which has not yet become science. For our purpose we are skimming the mountain tops you must know a disease either leprosy or one very much like it was observed. It was classified as contagious. It was beyond treatment available in those days. The wise men observed. They classified. They made their decision. Leprosy, not leprosy, unclean, clean. Someone might say that the specialty of dermopathology or pathology was short, was born. In start an art of cosmetology flourished. A visit to the Metropolitan Museum of Art will repay you if you would glance at the display cases of the implements of beautification of ancient Egypt and other lands bordering the Mediterranean. We'll leave the ancients at this note. We jump a century to the times of the discovery of the new world. Why? Because at that period a new disease or a new form of an old disease was observed in Europe. It was difficult to classify. For 50 years it had no name other than geographical reference to each old world section as a French disease, the Italian disease and so on. A contagious nature of the ailment. It's most usual modes of transfer gradually came known. Printing by the movable type of Gutenberg made the facts available to those who could read. Word of mouth distortions dropped. By 1530 Fracastoro wrote his poem naming the victim of the new disease syphilis. He also wrote on molecules of contagion. Nobody much paid attention to that. The name syphilis impressed itself on the entire word. This disease had a name. Everything relating to leprosy was transferred to syphilis. The priests, the philosophers, the poets, and the princesses rushed to the bandwagon, the physicians too. Leprosy declined an importance in Europe. Syphilis was the object of observation and classification. The same weight was placed on unclean, clean. In brief, observations of continuous covering of man was important. It made possible in physicians, the life or near life sentence of treatment for leprosy and later with syphilis or relieved the patient of that dire mode of life. This is oversimplification. It must be so in this short exposition of the subject. Despite Fracastoro and his molecules of contagion, the people wise and not so wise did not accept any theory of bacteria. They had no microscopes, no mode of staining. They made very good observations and excellent classifications. They tried every mode of treatment from the vegetable kingdom, from the animal kingdom, from the mineral kingdom. It was not the right time for them try synthetics. That came later, much later. One was strangely affected by the choice of the examples of leprosy and syphilis in our history of dermatology. Each in a systemic infection we know that. The ancients and renaissance scientists were not all together certain. Perhaps then you would understand and partly too that those philosophers, priests, poets and princesses and physicians did not limit their observations, classifications and treatments for disease with contagious manifestations. Exactly so the age of specialism had no not dawned. The wise man and all those who read were wise, considered the universe their field. Then the realm of the cutaneous arts, they observed disease of the hair, skin and nails. They observed animal parasites. They discoursed on beautification of men and women. When you visited the [inaudible] museum, did you think of the mummification and beautification of the dead? If not, you must visit Cairo for an hour in a special room reserved for Tutankhamen relics. The wise surgeons, physicians, women doctors observed the skin looking at the tongue until most recently would not only have the patient to keep quiet during the examination, but to disclose external signs to the physician. The Far East contributed a form of protection against small pox or inoculation, moist and dry, a scare from a patient from non-protected use. Have several dates in mind. In the beginning of recorded history to about Hippocrates, say 400 BC and the discovery of the New World, 1492. The next date is equally easy, say the Great Fire of London, the one in 1666. Why? Because that is good to recall on the earliest days to observation. The compound enlarging glass we dignify with the name of microscope. Leeuwenhoek may or may not have discovered the lens system. He was certainly one of the very first to see, observe, classify and record. He made drawings of spermatozoa, red blood cells, many path organisms and a minute structure of muscle tissue. He wrote a treatise on the mite. It was about the mites of cheese and flour and other stored foods. No mention of the mite of scabies where the itch was found. Aide to observation. Enlargement to a series of lenses brought advances into studied the minute structures including the skin. The sister art of botany received its greatest boost to the recording of the system of classification by Carl von Linne; 1707-1778. Disease of the skin proves of the [inaudible] names which crowned by classification to the contribution of Joseph Plenk; 1738-1807. Plenk was variously a professor of chemistry, botany, surgery, anatomy, obstetrics in Vienna. He published in 1776 a text which presented the first practical system of the [inaudible] of dermatology. Frankly it followed the systems of Linne. It offered dermatologists a language to transfer their observations. Plenk provided a classification. Fortunately or no it was based on external appearances. It was better than what did not exist prior to 1776. It proved a foundation of other more complicated and often times too complicated systems. Physicians who had not yet the period of dermatologists in each of the great geographical and language sections of Europe grasped the system of Plenk and molded it to their own aims. In England it was a of team of women in Bateman. In France it was Loy [assumed spelling]. In France too we name Alibert or the fame of Hopital Saint-Louis. Each had followers. Each had modifiers. Note we name no one from Germany. We must wait until the middle of the next century for the name of the founder of our kind of dermatology, the kind that flourished into the early 20th Century. It is easy to remember the date we offer, 1848. The Year of Decision. We name Ferdinand Hebra, 1810-1880. His original study begins with the creation especially of dermatology was in the field of scabies. Refresh your recollection of the period. The patients with skin diseases were in the worst of disease of the chest. Scabies was a prevalent skin disease. Through his labors Hebra created the Vienna School of Thought of Dermatology. Listen, The School of Thought of Dermatology, the external school, causation from without. He formulated the dictum, no acarus, no scabies. He recreated a therapy based on external applications. He followed a form of dermatology with reliance and clinical inspection, observation once more and classification. He requires his observation with his son-in-law, Moritz Kaposi, 1837-1902. The aide to observation, the microscope was utilized. Measurable parasites were uncovered as the true chord of disease of the scalp, hair and skin. In brief, we add a festival of external courses of skin diseases. This again is simplification. For our purpose we hold the Vienna School of Thought and Dermatology emphasized the external. A recital of discoveries of bacteria caused of disease of the skin about the period of the year of decision, 1848 is truly imposing. We go to the French School of Thought and Dermatology. Its founder was Alibert with a prevalent of short and his very short, resume or epitome of the history of dermatology we say the French School of Thought and Dermatology different from the Vienna School of Thought. Alibert had scabies to be doomed to the effect of some admissible substance circulating in the blood that produced the disorder of the skin. All this as a key to the approaches to the French School of Thought and Dermatology. It nor the idea advanced by others that the presumed high instance of syphilis led to the notion simple loss of hair and sparks the areas outside of alopecia areata ophiasis was new to cryptic syphilis. Of course each school recognized the energy of thought of certain diseases to the opinion of the other. In brief, this classification is made. One, diseases in which only the skin is involved. Two, diseases due to some internal fault in which the expression is found on the skin. Three, we have a mix type. But first dermatology in the United States was improved more by the Vienna School of Thought and Dermatology than by the French School of Thought. The pioneers in this specialty found a physical school in Vienna when the classification of hospitals were more convenient than the hospitals of Paris widely separated geographically. Perhaps too it was easier than French for our people. First modern American contributions of dermatology was made by Thomas Casper Gilcrest, 1862-1927. He uncovered the cost of blastomycetic dermatitis, 1896. Our English cousins in dermatology were commissioners first and dermatologist second. We name James Erasmus Wilson, 1809-1884. He was a famous anatomist and surgeon. He was opposed to specialization, yet devoted himself to dermatology. We name Garrison Hutchison, 1828-1919. He was a super specialist in major surgery, ophthalmology, neurology, syphilology and dermatology. Let us say the English School of Dermatology to commit course [inaudible] both sides of the street. More about our own beloved United States. Let us proudly say dermatology was born in Vienna School of Thought and Tradition. We accepted the observation, classification, external treatment pathway, there were reservations. We were not blind followers of any one's school. We started with observation then more or less to the unaided eye, a still eye it was. We accepted the microscope and improved upon it. We've found a limit to external core skin disease. Let us say the USA School of Dermatology was eclectic. It chose the best from each and crooned upon it. The world's best known [inaudible] is for the American Louis Duhring, 1845-1913. Everywhere the name of Jay Frank Schamberg; 1870-1934 it associated with progressive pigmentary disease of the skin. Silas Weir Mitchell, 1829-1914, erythromelagia. A Philadelphia neurologist Francis Xavier Dercum, 1856-1931 presented adiposis dolorosa. Henry Koplik; 1858-1927 tells us about the spots named for him appearing before it became the signs of measles. American dermatologists grant us often of associated sciences. The zealous were for our field, in the may there was [inaudible] and fair conservation. We accepted newcomers from abroad. Our youth and oldsters went to Europe time and time again. Specialists from all the world visited these shores. Great conferences [inaudible] exchange of ideas. Their literature, periodicals and books, abstracts and discussions led to an astounding appreciation of each school of thought in dermatology. Soon our post graduate institutions assumed their place in the sun. A new dawn, day was dawning. Some think night was descending upon dermatology born in 1848. The 20th Century brought the fruits of new and terrifying results of adventure into the field of synthesis along conventional chemical lines and then the less conventional ones of physics. The 19th Century dermatologist with his frock coat, his simple [inaudible] and a black string around his neck, dictum. Yes syphilis, no syphilis. His prescription pad was doomed. What started this? Our old friend syphilis. The advances made in syphilis and the new sciences of serology, bacteriology instead of chemistry. The [inaudible] of 606. It was the first nail of doom. Silas said it offered problems, observations and classification [inaudible]. Biochemistry was born and required a new type of school. It was not enough to have add eyesight and the passive of remembering pictures. Dermatology became a living, vibrant, dynamic subject. The adherence of the dense static picture book dermatology accepted the new or withered underbind. It was a logical pathway. It led from the first pathway result of the chemistry of the board William Perkin, 1838-1903 and his guys Silas or Port Haley, 1854-1914 to [inaudible]. A collateral pathway led to the adventures of Alexander Fleming, 1881-1955. Howard Walker Floyd, born 1898, [inaudible] Dubois born in 1901, [inaudible] Rathsman, born in 1888. The impact of their production on dermatology are being felt at this very moment. Then we have the super highway, the status far back as recorded history when pharaohs rubbed a piece of fossil in the resin. He observed the amber and cracked a viss of claws and feathers as a child he repeated this experiment years ago. [inaudible] step by step, each pioneer stepping higher through the workers predecessors, electricity expands it. We know so few names. William Gilbert, 1544-1603. Isaac Newton, 1642-1727. Benjamin Franklin, 1706-1790. Alexander Bolter, 1745-1827. Luigi Galvanni,1737-1798. The fabulous family of Becareau, then to James Alexander Maxwell, 1831-1879. William Crookes, 1832-1919. Heinrich Hertz, 1857-1894. Guglielmo Marconi, 1874-1937, Marie Sklodowska Curie, 1867-1934. Her husband Pierre Curie 1859-1906. Albert Einstein, 1877-1955. Niels Bohr, born 1885. Enrico Fermi, born 1901. Lise Meitner, born 1878 and Harold Urey born 1893. A far cry from rubbing a piece of dry resin. A far cry from the observation classification of recording of dermatologist 25 years ago. Today the dermatologist must be all things to all people. His workshop is as cluttered as the laboratory of the [inaudible] of old. He delves into chemistry his father did not dream of and seeks the answer to the riddle grandchildren will not know. In close we brief this mention of the one single greatest influence on dermatology since discovery of America. An answer to the year of decision we refer to 1798, that was the year for dermatology where you believe in dermatopathology or cosmetology. When consistently consider the skin and health or in disease. Reflect one moment the time it takes your watch to click. References made of course to the transition by Edward Jenner, 1749-1823 of cowpox, accidently transferred to certain protection against the scar of the smallpox. Then they removed a knee for six veils by brides They opened the skin on the face to the sun. He made a clear skin a desirable asset. He added to our problems in the bill of biology as an reaction of human beings obnoxious materials all in the field of dermatology.

